Today I begin my diary. I used to laugh at anyone who did it, for I thought it foolish and sentimental and I also believe that a lot of girls do it as an “affectation”, as Marie S. would say, but now I believe after all that it will be good for me, because doing it will make me learn to reflect on everything I do or have done and it will perhaps help me to become better. For in the routine of daily life there is so little time to reflect, and sometimes days go by when I don’t actually live, but let life happen to me, and that’s terrible. I would think it dreadful to have to say at the end of my life: “I’ve actually lived for nothing, I have achieved nothing great or noble,” and yet I believe that something like that could happen. I have already lived for years but if I were to die now like Mien Doorman, I should have to say: “I’ve done nothing”. They would be sad at home, of course, but they wouldn’t miss me very much, for I always think of myself first and never of anyone else and I have a nasty temper, so that I often upset everything, but oh I feel that this must change. She was so sweet, so good, she was one of those quiet spirits, who go their way unobserved and yet spread so much love and happiness everywhere. Oh, now she’s gone, now I see this for the first time, too late alas; if I’d known everything, I would have been kinder to her, then I would have got to know her better and perhaps I would have been better myself too. It’s too late now but I have now resolved: I must change, dearest, oh, Mien might you know in Heaven how we’re getting on here, is your spirit really floating around us, as I so fondly imagine; oh, help me then, strengthen me in what is good, keep temptation away from me, be my guardian angel! This morning we went to the churchyard and visited her grave, but as I stand there, I simply cannot imagine that it is she who lies there under the earth; instinctively I look up at the sky, to the glorious blue sky; but is she there? De Génestet is right when he says: We walk the earth in riddles; I shan’t weary myself with that any more, one day these riddles will be solved for us.
I don’t really know how one writes a diary, but I’ll gradually become accustomed to it; I think it’s because I want to write so much, so much that’s been occupying me for years. Oh, now and then my head is so full, then it sometimes seems as if it can’t contain a single new thought, that’s why I’m doing what Goethe did; if he was full of something, he wrote a verse about it and then he was rid of it. I shall try to do this too and bring all my thoughts together in this book.
Dries is writing a diary, too, but I’ve never read anything from it; that’s a good thing too for one would unconsciously start writing differently and make things seem better and nicer than they are and that mustn’t happen. I want to write the truth, nothing but the truth. I confess it to myself, I’m very bad – ugly as I am, I’m still often vain and sometimes I imagine that I look quite nice, and I also often imagine that I am not as insipid and narrow-minded as other girls etc. etc., oh I could carry on for a long time summing up faults, but I shall stop now and instead do my best to correct them. And now enough for today.
I went to church with Jo this morning, but I don’t know what it was, I couldn’t concentrate, only the end really moved me, it was magnificent; oh I like Valès a lot, I think that he’s a really good person; if I could always go about with someone like that, I think life would be much pleasanter and easier? But it still wouldn’t help a great deal, for everyone has to live for himself and is responsible for it. Oh, if only I knew how to live.
I got a letter from Anne this morning, a sweet, warm letter. I shallanswer her soon and when she comes back, I shall do my best not to be jealous when she talks about all the fun she’s had, for I think it’s jealousy that makes me unable to bear all those stories she sometimes tells. Although she’s sweet and affectionate I don’t think she will ever be a friend to me in the true sense of the word, because she doesn’t understand me. Lena is nicer to talk to and the association with her does me a lot of good for she is poetic in the true sense of the word.
But her situation at home is so very different from mine and on top of that she’s engaged and so a good deal older in experience of life than I am. I don’t think my ideal friend will ever be realized, any more than the ideal man that I’ve made for myself. Is it foolish to think about it? I don’t believe so, for after all I’m already now and then one may sometimes think about it. But no, I resolved not to write any foolish things in this book and I hope I shall stick to it. Of course it isn’t foolish to love someone deeply, really passionately, but that’s still a long way off, and should it ever happen, I don’t think I’d want to write about it – so there’s an end to it.
Only two more days until the end of the holidays, I don’t know whether I’m pleased or not; on the one hand it’s nice that I’ll see Miss G. again, but I don’t love her so terribly much any more; all the same she did me a lot of good; during all these years I’ve been at school she was the magnet that attracted me, I thought the day she wasn’t at school was awful and the mere thought that I could hear her footsteps overhead made me happy. That was silly, I know, but she was and still is an ideal woman to me. I think of her in everything I do, whether she would approve or disapprove, what she would say about it if she knew or what she would do in this case, and when I’m in her presence, I’m as shy and anxious as a little child. I could have got to know her much better, for Anne often gave me the chance, but it’s my own fault; perhaps it’s better this way, I placed her on a pedestal so high that I can never reach it myself; to me she is friendly, kind, natural, sociable and what’s more her beautiful drawing, oh she is gifted, very gifted, and when I’ve left school and probably won’t meet her often any more I shall always preserve the memory of her; as one of the sweetest images of my youth. And should I ever see my dream realized, should I ever write a book, it will be she who will be in my mind when I describe the heroine.
I would like to go on writing a little longer, but it’s better if I write to Anne now.
School started again this morning, but it was so boring that I don’t know how I shall be able to endure it until the summer holidays. I must do my best to pay better attention then perhaps the time will pass more quickly; one thing was nice this morning, Marie was there again. It is as if the relationship between us is much more agreeable since Mien’s death, as if I like her much more. I hope that our plan to do an English exam together will succeed, it will be wonderful to work hard for a purpose; if only I was finished with school! 
A letter from Dries came today, my dear Dries, oh I wish that he was here again; no one who understands me as well, no one with whom I can speak so openly about everything than he, but it is now over for good. Even if he comes back for a week in the summer, even if he were to settle here again later, those carefree childhood years are past, those walks arm in arm during the lovely summer evenings in the park will not come again, for he’s gradually becoming a man now, a man who’s learnt to be independent and to trust in his own strengths, and so would he confide all his ideals, his dreams, all his plans for the future to his simple, stupid little sister who knows so little of life? Oh, I’m afraid he won’t, but all the same no one will love him as much as I do; he’s my pride, my glory, oh may he one day become everything I expect of him. If only I could just see him there in that great bustling Paris, oh I think that he must often long for his home, would he often think of me? I long to see him so much.
It’s almost dark so I must hurry if I want to write a few more lines; I really don’t feel much like it, for it was not a nice day today; outside everything is dark and grey, stormy clouds race across the sky, heavy raindrops are falling and the wind howls and moans just as it did the day Mien died. Oh, I could cry until I had no more tears left yet without any reason, and I feel unhappy. I’ve never understood so well what Weltschmerz is as I do today. Oh, if only summer would come; the friendly sunbeams enter my heart, Lena once said and she’s right, they can drive out all gloominess, all doubt, and sometimes make me feel so happy; then it’s as if the world is too confining for me, I want to shout to everyone: “oh, how beautiful everything is here on this earth”. Yes, when summer comes I shall be perfectly happy again.
Another day lived for nothing; oh, how dreadful it is that I can’t change myself, what am I to do? If only I had someone to advise me, to help me a little, but there isn’t anyone. They don’t understand me at home. They think I’m grumpy and bad-tempered, but it isn’t that. I just feel unhappy; when Lena gets back I shall be able to talk to her about it, but then again actually not, for she’s so happy now that she won’t be able to put herself in my place any more. And anyway it’s all just foolishness; why should I be unhappy, I have everything I could possibly want; in fact I’m ungrateful. Oh, if only I had Dries again! I’ve spent the whole afternoon today thinking about our dear Mien, oh, I still can’t understand it. It’s too late now, but tomorrow morning I shall copy out that beautiful verse in the Family Herald, it always made me think of her.

Our lost Lily. 

Once more the flowers spring side by side
Called forth by April rain
One blossom in the winter died
That will not come again.



The fairest of our fireside flowers
Cut down by wintry winds
Fell off and now in Eden’s bowers
A surer shelter finds.



In vain the mother urged her love,
Death’s mission knew no stay
“I take your child” he said, above
To show yourself the way.



O joy to think all ties of love
That Death has power to sever
Shall be restored to us above
Unbroken there for ever.

Oh, that would be really blissful, but is it true? Is mankind destined to become perfectly happy one day? I don’t know and I hardly dare believe it; I at least would never deserve such happiness, perhaps a few who are worthy of it will receive it one day.
At the moment the sun is just breaking through dark clouds, and it is as if the sweet rays make everything bright and cheerful. Even my heart. Oh, if only I could always be in free, glorious nature, then I think I’d be much better, for the mere sight of the magnificent sky at the moment shows the ordinariness of life; I don’t know how to express myself. I’m not used to analysing my thoughts and feelings so that I can write them down, but I mean it very differently.
“You say your own native self. Do you then feel as I often do, that there is a second, possibly a native self, deep hid beneath the self – not merely what we show to the world in common (that may merely be a mask) – but the self that we ordinarily accept even when in solitude, as our own, an inner innermost self; oh so different and so rarely coming forth from its hiding place, asserting its right of sovereignty, and putting out the other self, as the sun puts out a star?
“Where is that innermost self, so deep down, so deep, yet when it does come forth, so much higher, higher, immeasurably higher than one’s every day self? It longs to get to the stars and then, ah how soon it fades back again!” (Kenelm Chillingly. Bulwer.) 
I’m in such a strange mood today that I don’t even know how I actually am; I’m different from one moment to the next; now deeply unhappy, then very cheerful, it’s odd. I think it’s because of all these engagements; my dear Lena! I hope she will be very, very happy. This is also certainly the reason why we’ve talked so much about love and marriage at school recently, things I never think about otherwise, and even now I can’t imagine that something like that will ever happen to me.
When I went home with Anne, we were very cheerful and excited at first, but when we passed Mrs Doorman’s house we were suddenly silent and sad. Mr Doorman was sitting at the window and greeted us in a very friendly way; poor people, how much they must miss their child. Oh why didn’t I die instead of Mien, she was so good and so indispensable at home and I.–! But I think that this is precisely the reason; she was good, but I still have to experience so much and learn so much, for oh, I am so bad; instead of getting better I go further and further backwards, it is so hard.
I’m not nice to Anne either. She’s always so friendly and affectionate to me and I only ever think about her faults, when she really boasts or something, and completely forget how often I’m unfriendly and nasty to her. Oh, we must learn to put up with each other and like each other with all our faults.
It was a good day at school today, at least this afternoon. How wonderful it is to have someone you can tell everything, like Lena and Marie, then you see things in a very different light from when you keep them to yourself and always brood on them. I agree with Marie, it’s just because of these engagements that we talk so much about being in love and such things it must be in the air. As far as I’m concerned, it’s just my foolishness and I shall do my best not to think about it any more. But he always comes into my mind; always I see again those splendid, serious eyes before me and that noble, serious face. Oh I’m not in love, as others say to tease me, but when I imagine an ideal of someone whom I could love a lot, it always looks like him. Oh what a fool I am; I was so determined not to write any nonsense and now that’s just what I’m doing, for what else is this?
I hope that Rie and I can start studying properly next week, with hard work all this foolishness will pass, and I shall be much happier too.
I wasn’t friendly to Anne again today. I don’t understand how it happens, that we’ve got on so badly recently, for that’s what it is actually; the fault is chiefly mine, I shall do my best to change it tomorrow. And now I’m really going to get down to work.
It’s already late and I’m tired, so I shan’t write much this evening. Again, such a disagreeable feeling of dissatisfaction about the poor way I spent the day! If only I had something to get my teeth into, perhaps it would get better. I have never sat through such a disagreeable hour as when Miss van Kappen read aloud from Victor Hugo. It was magnificent, glorious, everything you could want, but I felt so unhappy that I wanted to burst into tears. Could someone like that young girl in the garret really exist? Oh, how terribly bad I am! I often thought about Mien today; that makes me better. I shall now see to it that when I write tomorrow I can be more satisfied with myself, so until tomorrow!
I haven’t written in my diary for a few days and I ended the last time with such good intentions! What has come of it? That I’ve been even worse than otherwise these last few days. Can’t I change, then? If Lena leaves school too now, and I have to do without her as well, I shall be at an absolute loss; at least I can still talk to her about everything and she was always so kind and friendly to me. She’ll still come to see us, of course, and we shall still talk to her sometimes, but it’s the same as with Dries, that time is past, past forever. And I’m still so young and I’ve already had to say farewell to so many I loved. What will it be like when I’m old? I might be all alone. Now I only have Marie; we two are all who are left of our little set, because I don’t actually count Anne as one of us, she’s only been at school such a short time. And in heaven, one who found her heaven here on earth, and we two, Rie and I, must go on through life alone, always seeking and striving for our ideal. Which of us will reach her goal first? Oh, how strange and changeable life is. The notice of the death of “Wilhelmine Christine Doorman” and the engagement announcement of Helene de Ruyter and H.R.B. lie together in my writing case and for a few months we were all together, still a little group of carefree, foolish children who looked forward to a comic play! Who knows what will have happened to us in a few months’ time.
Oh, Mien, if only I were half as good as you were!
I had a lovely day with Marie yesterday, it was very pleasant, I just hope they didn’t find me very dull; I would be sorry if they did.
 Gringoire, how splendid it was. Oh, I would love to have such a man, so noble, so great, such a poet. “Who will relieve the poor, for them this life is only suffering.” How many people could one not say that of.
Lena has now left school for good; I find it strange, very strange, quiet and lonely. We were always so used to giving each other signals of approval or disapproval whenever something was read aloud, our gazes always sought one another out, and how sociably we could talk to one another in drawing class; gone, too, everything gone. I don’t feel much like writing this evening, not much to write about, so until tomorrow.
How I enjoyed yesterday evening. The Schöpfung was superb, divinely beautiful; oh, to be able to sing like that, life must be wonderful it seems to me. And Lena was there too, I was so happy to see her again; it seemed as if we hadn’t seen each other in ages, and I also miss her so at school. School! Hateful word, oh if only I were free of it; I am so angry at the whole thing that I can’t find the words for it; if I possibly can, I shall speak out and tell the truth on Monday, at least to Allebé. It won’t help, of course, but anyway. Oh, how difficult life is; people are all so insincere, so unnatural, no one who ever helps me, no one who does something for me, for they don’t know me, they don’t know what goes on inside me, oh I don’t know myself: “it is a mess”.
I’ve sometimes thought that all those verses to spring and all those Maytime ditties were actually hackneyed and boring, and I still do when one reads them, but this morning in the park, oh then it was just as if I felt for the first time what spring is. First I felt the warm, young life tingling in the veins, then I felt all the poetry in the burgeoning of the young, fresh leaves and buds then I felt the warm, animating breath of the lovely sunbeams, oh then I wanted to be a poet so I could express all this, then I fully understood that beautiful song by Beets for the first time:


Your silver note
Had I your breath, oh nightingales,
In every hill and every valley
I would repeat your poignant song
So full, so beautiful. 

And while I write this down, all I can see are the red roofs of our neighbours across the street lit by the glowing sun, and a very small piece of the beautiful blue sky, and in my imagination I see a large, noble forest with tall, centuries-old oaks where the sun plays cheerfully on the leaves, and beneath them a clear silver stream that babbles softly over the green, scented moss, where the sweet violet raises its humble head. Oh, when I think about something like that I am overcome by an irresistible longing for the outdoors; then I want to shout out with De Génestet : “Oh outdoors, outdoors my heart opens so gloriously.” Will my longing ever be fulfilled? But I don’t want to be ungrateful; here in the city we can still find enjoyment, if only a little. Dries always went into raptures about the Vondelpark; I plan to go there a lot.
I haven’t written anything for a few days; it really doesn’t serve the purpose for I can’t write exactly what I think or feel. Recently I’ve been so foolish again and so unhappy when I have nothing to look forward to and nothing nice to think about, then I feel terribly unhappy and horrible. “One should devote oneself not to a man, but to a principle.’’ I forget that all too easily; now shall I for the thousand and first time resolve to become better, to change? Oh, what is a human being, in fact; who will fathom them out, the secrets of our existence, why are we alive, what are we living for, what is our purpose, what is life? These are all questions no one can answer for me, yet still occupy me so much all the time. But most of all, what is that “inner innermost self” Kenelm Chillingly speaks of, and that I, too, feel sometimes. What is it that gives us such a sad, dismal feeling when we read or hear something beautiful? Yesterday evening in Hamlet, when he sung ‘Doubt thou light, doubt heaven and earth, but never, never doubt my love’, I wanted to cry. Oh I wish someone could explain all that to me, that someone could teach me how I should live.
I was at a dance yesterday evening; I enjoyed myself very much. Oh, I do love it when everyone is so polite to you and makes it seem as if having a dance with you is the most wonderful thing they could wish for (although I know very well that they don’t mean any of it), but all the same I wouldn’t want to go often. When we went there in that glorious weather, that beautiful blue sky and a fresh spring breeze blowing in our faces, I felt it was almost a shame to go dancing in a hot, stuffy, crowded room. There is something impure, something shameful about it; the light, the music, the gaiety, everything serves to entangle your senses; people talk, laugh and walk to and fro, but I, at least, wasn’t myself; it was as if I was doing everything in a dream; no, I shouldn’t want to go often. A walk in the lovely open air is much more edifying, much better for a person.
And yesterday evening I heard that he (Willem Leijds) also loved Mien so much! Now I understand why he can sometimes look so terribly sad and serious, poor man; if only I could do something to help him or comfort him. Now I know this, I think even worse of myself than I did before that I think about him so often; it’s as if I’m betraying our poor Mien! Would she have known? Would she have loved him too? Oh, what a wonderful life she could have had. Filled with the love of someone like him, oh, her fate is enviable in a way; now I realize for the first time how good and kind she was, that he could have loved her, now I see for the first time that it’s not to do with cleverness or wit, but just goodness. It’s as if I can hear her voice whispering to me: Jo, be simple and friendly and kind, and try to lead a useful life, that’s all that’s needed.
They say that mankind is the most perfect thing that exists in Creation, but I don’t believe it. It’s true, mankind is gifted with intellect (although I’m not so sure that animals and plants don’t have that too), but for what ignoble, worthless, selfish things he uses it. If people were all unselfish and noble and not always bent on their own advantage , then mankind would be the noblest being in Creation, but this is not so: at least I’ve never met anyone like that. No, the flowers are much more beautiful and sweeter and purer, aren’t they? They don’t try to do one another harm, but they live on quietly, always turned towards the friendly sunshine, drenched with pearly dewdrops in the morning, kissed by the last rays of the sun in the evening, and then they softly close their petals and slumber peacefully. And the trees, how cordially they bend their branches down towards one another, and when the wind rustles them, what a melodious sighing and whispering one hears. What could they be telling one another all the time, and the water that ripples murmuring on, where is it always speeding? Oh, the secrets of nature are as unfathomable as those of our existence, but I also believe that one should not try to fathom them, but just enjoy beautiful nature and do our best to remain pure and sweet like the flowers.
I don’t think I hate anyone in the world as much as myself. Why am I so foolish, so bad, so unhappy? Can’t I change?
I really envy Lena; I never thought that she would ever be so happy, may it always remain so; are humans really destined to be happy! Oh, if only I knew. Sometimes, when I’m on the point of doing or saying something unfriendly, I think: Mien wouldn’t have done that. She wouldn’t approve, and that thought stops me. Oh, I want to do my best not to do or think anything base or ignoble, I want to do my best to become better, for if I ever got to know him, I wouldn’t want him to think I was bad or despise me.
I am in a horrid dilemma; I don’t even know what to call it. Could the association with Marie really not be good for me? It’s not true, I know she’s conceited, but I shall really do my best not to become like that, and although they are rather worldly, what does it matter? I really could learn to be a little more free and easy. And then I have to say that Marie is always very good to talk to, not just to have fun but about serious things, too. I think Anne is more to be trusted, but once in a while she can be very dull; but still I shall not let Anne go because of it or like her less; one can still have friends at the same time; although neither of them are actually friends, I’m afraid I shall never find friends. I do feel that I’ve changed recently; I’m afraid it’s not a change for the good, I don’t know; oh, may I do my best to remain simple! But I can’t help it; yesterday e.g., when we went with Philip to Artis, I did my best to be nice the whole time so that he wouldn’t think I was boring, and yet I really couldn’t care less about him. I wish I could get to know myself a bit better.
It’s our Dries’s birthday today. Oh, if only I could just fly over to see him. And the letter I wrote him, which I so much intended would be so warm and cheer him up, turned out so unpleasant, so cool, so superficial, so very different from what I wanted. It’s my own fault as usual, I always think about myself and I was so full of other things the whole day that I just dashed something off at the last minute; how horrible of me. Oh, if only I could just be with him for a moment, right now. They’re playing music downstairs and he might be thinking about home right at this moment and longing for it; how selfish I am, dreadful egotist that I am, that I think relatively so little about him, or rather be fully aware of how lonely it must be for him there. Oh, just wait till he comes this summer!
Now I’ve read how Lamartine’s mother wrote her diary and he himself, too, I see that I’m doing it all wrong. I must set aside an hour every evening, and write down precisely everything that happened, or rather not happened but everything I thought and did myself. And that’s just what I can’t do, because I never account to myself for my own deeds and thoughts; however, I shall try it from now on.
It’s Mien’s birthday today. Oh, dearest, do you have any idea that you would have been today? years old! Life should really just be starting for you; it all lay ahead of you, so full, so rich. And you would certainly have been happy: good people are always happy because they are contented and you were always that. But might it be even more wonderful in Heaven, are you really happy now? Mien, if only I knew where you are. I wanted so badly to go to the churchyard today, it’s as if I’m closer to you there, but I couldn’t, and now the rain is pouring down outside, the same as on that day; it’s as if nature is also weeping for the young, burgeoning life which lies there under that cold, black earth. Poor mother, how distressed she will be when she thinks of that grave out there in the dark night, oh it is awful. Mien, be my guardian angel; can’t you help me to become good?
I shall see whether I can’t write down something from this morning’s sermon; it was so beautiful, but the impression it makes on me is always so fleeting.
If a man die, shall he live again? I didn’t get a real answer to that question, but oh, when he spoke so about duty and the consequences of every act, of every one of our words, for others, too, then I thought: how little do I really understand the seriousness of life, duty? It is actually just a hollow sound to me; when have I ever achieved a victory over myself! But I will do it now; from now on I really will at least do my best to become good, Oh God, give me your holy spirit, your help, for I can do nothing alone.
I shall begin by not thinking about him any more, at least make no effort to see him and thus ruin my mood and everything as I’ve been doing recently. I shall also try to think less about myself. But what actually is my duty? Oh, I know, to be kind, merry and cheerful, for the children, especially to do a bit more for Beb and above all to remain simple, and I haven’t quite been that recently. Oh I do feel it; I’ve changed from before, but that’s essential, to stand still is to go backwards and after all Still higher must be everyone’s motto; I shall now try to change in a good way; I feel that I’m no longer a child, I want to live usefully.
Another week has passed since the last time I wrote. What has become of my good intentions; have I got any better? No, absolutely not, but perhaps if I keep thinking about it and am supported in being good, it will eventually succeed. If only I could just write what I really feel, I would want to say so much and it comes to nothing. How well Valès preached this morning; I intend to go and listen to him as much as possible; oh, I wish I knew him well , that I could speak to him in confidence, that he could teach me how to live. For I’m still so young, I still have so much to learn, and I learn everything to cultivate my mind: literature, languages, history, everything possible, but who helps me to learn to live well, who teaches me what I should believe? And that is much more needed, after all, and particularly for me; I have such need of a support, of good guidance, then I would be better able to do my best, but now it is desperate work. And I can’t talk to Pa about such things; Pa is very good and would want to help me if I talked to him about it, but he wouldn’t understand me anyway.
The sun set ages ago and I want to quickly make use of the meagre daylight just to write a few lines. What? I don’t know myself, I’m in a strange mood again today. I would just so like to know whether Ma actually has a reason why she doesn’t really like me going to the Stumpffs a lot, or if she’s just saying it. I don’t know what I should do, I can’t just suddenly abandon her and I don’t want to either, because she’s always very sweet and kind to me. I know that they are a bit worldly and conceited, but I shall certainly never learn anything bad from her. I can talk to her much more enjoyably about good, noble things than with Anne; she’s often so blinkered, she wants everything from me and I’ve not got far enough myself for that. Well, that’s the way of the world; people just judge by appearances. Ma adores Anne, and Mien too, and I do know she’s got a very good heart, better than Rie and me, perhaps, and that’s actually the main thing. It’s true, but she can very occasionally think up peculiar things, e.g. this desire to get married at all costs. If Ma heard someone else say that, she would certainly think it was crazy. Anyway, I can still learn a lot from both of them; if only I knew what to do now. Yes, I must take care and not let myself be carried along by everyone; be simple and stay simple. So long as one has principles!!
I shall go to school for the last time tomorrow! It’s actually a big event for me; then life will really start. I will have to learn to trust and rely on myself. It would be so wonderful if Pa or Ma or someone would just talk to me and help me and tell me how I should spend my life, but no one thinks of it, they think it’s just an ordinary day for me; perhaps if I’m a bit serious or sad tomorrow, they’ll only say I’m in a bad mood. No, I believe for sure that I shall find something to do. I’m going to start working hard on my English and then I’ll go further. My tendency to laziness, Dries would say, sometimes suffuses me. It’s easier to do nothing, but I shall resist it, I will do something, I want to make myself useful now, and I should also like to have a larger environment, a broader horizon. I would like to associate with people a little more, get a little more experience. Is it very foolish? Perhaps it is. Old people will certainly think so, but still it’s no more than natural; I’d love it. Just to go abroad for once; I would long for home, but it would still be nice. Staying at home all the time is not good either. You can see it in the girls, who go out so little and know few people; they really are becoming rather awkward. I don’t mean Lien, for she is a housekeeper at heart and enjoys doing it. She’s actually like someone out of a book, so cheerful and neat and happy, so really good, because being at home is actually enough for her. It doesn’t suit Mien. Recently she’s been grumbling and complaining all the time, and she’s discontented if she doesn’t go out and angry if she does ever go, and I would feel the same if I stayed at home all the time. So just get down to work; I wish I’d heard Hugenholtz’s sermon yesterday, it might have helped. I so need a word of encouragement, of comfort. When Dries comes on Saturday (oh, joyful day), I shall talk to him about it. I had a lovely day at Marie’s yesterday. I really liked her cousin.
Left school! That time is behind me now, with all its boredom and nastiness, but also with all its pleasure, its carefree, innocent fun. I’m already beginning to feel that I shall long to go back one day. Oh, if only Mien could have spent this day with us; how wonderful it would have been for her to come home to her Mama, she had always longed for it so, and I come home and nobody cares.
I didn’t have time to write any more this afternoon and I wasn’t in a good mood either; it will go better now, it’s a quiet part of the day and will help to pass the time for Dries isn’t coming until half past eight and it’s only half past six now. I’m sitting in his chair in its old place; tomorrow he’ll be sitting here himself again, the room is nice and tidy; the flowers I bought this morning are on the windowsill, that’s at least something I’ve done for him myself, for Lien did the room. I hadn’t even thought of it; could that be proof that Lien loved him more, or at least better? With me it’s just words, or rather thoughts, and with her it’s deeds. I don’t believe it, though, for it happens now because I know there is always someone who takes care of everything, but otherwise I would certainly have done it myself. There is also a lovely little flower arrangement on the table; oh what could possibly be lovelier than flowers? I wouldn’t say all of them, for some are just ordinary, but those pale pink roses that smell so divine, I don’t believe anything lovelier exists. I can never really express what I feel, but when one sees a rose like that one can’t help thinking – no, I shall just stop my comparisons because it’s not working.
Downstairs they’re presently busy decorating the sitting room for the coming party.It will certainly be a busy week and nice, too, but one thing I firmly resolve now: I will do my best to make Thursday a day that everyone enjoys and think about myself as little as possible. I also have to take particular care of Anne; she’s built up such a picture of it, but I’d also hoped that Dries would look after Marie a bit; anyway, we shall see. I shall do my best.
And then once this week is over and peace and quiet are restored, I shall begin to reform. I hope I shall really settle then, because I haven’t for the last six months. I wish that I could just empty my head completely, think about nothing that happened before, that I could start again from the beginning for the first time. But that’s not possible, and I must have learnt a lot by now, I must have become wiser and more sensible – not as far as cleverness is concerned, but I have already had a bit of experience of life, even if it is only a little. I shall now start to live a good life, but it’s very difficult. I think reading good books helps a lot in that, but this A Life for a Life is really a bit impossible, at least I can’t imagine myself in that position. But I shall stop now, for I can’t sit still any longer; I hope I shall be able to have a good talk about everything with Dries.
The week full of enjoyment and pleasure is over, the party we all looked forward to for so long in advance is in the past – and Dries has been here. It’s now as if it’s been a dream, everything flew by so fast, but one thing does remain – the memory, a wonderful, pleasant memory of days of almost undisturbed happiness. And how sweet and kind Dries was; oh, I long for him so. 
I haven’t written for days and yet I had plenty of material. Who would ever have thought that Philip would ask Mien to be his wife? He was always so normal, so much the same to all of us; I actually had the most fun with him, particularly recently. Fool that I was to think that he quite liked me, but now I understand that it was more the way a brother regards his sister, and I would also like to have him as a brother.
How can a single word, a casual remark have such an effect? If Philip only knew what good he did with those few words he said to me on Sunday. They suddenly gave me a glimpse of his whole character; they opened up to me a world full of goodness, noble thoughts and true religion. “Although one has one’s own sorrows, one must not embitter someone else’s life or make it unpleasant; work is the only remedy for forgetting sorrow,” and when he said this I felt that he will need this remedy and indeed will use it And I, I felt so ashamed then, so childish compared with him. I’ve never really known sorrow, except when Dries left, and yet I embitter others’ lives without any reason, sometimes even his, or even if I don’t embitter them I don’t do my best to make it as pleasant as possible for them either. But now, since Sunday, I’ve really begun. In the space of two days I’ve succeeded; I’ve done as much as I could, I’ve helped Mien, I’ve worked; in short I’ve at least done my best while I think about him. Oh, if only I could carry on in the same way. This morning I’ve been in a bad mood again because of that annoying Aunt Net, but actually it’s not kind of me. I shall now regard it as the most difficult thing and if I eventually manage to be a bit friendlier and kinder to her, I shall have got a good deal further. For after all she is actually to be pitied; who knows what I shall be like when I’m old; oh, I shall do my best to be a bit better when the time comes.
We are working hard for the English examination and I hope that we pass, of course, but I still think I’d rather stay at home than go abroad, or teach at a school; I feel much more content at home and I realize now that I can also be very useful at home for there’s always plenty to do. I’ve been very good with Mien recently. I’ve often forgotten to look after her as I promised Piet so faithfully that evening, but the last two days I have done it and I shall carry on doing it. I shall also bravely start studying etudes; I’d love to learn to play a bit of piano again, but now I shall stop wasting my time writing and rather get down to some hard work. I feel very good today.
As I read over what I wrote last time, I don’t feel so very ashamed as I did at other times, because I really have progressed as I resolved to do. I have, though, fallen short in a lot of things, I’ve often been very nasty to Aunt Net, but I hope things will go a bit better this week. Everything’s all right now, except Anne. Whatever is the matter with her? I wish that she was also a bit in the same sort of mood I’m in, then it would be a lot more pleasant, but I can’t explain it to her and still I feel that I must do something for her, for she is definitely unhappy. If only I knew what. And now I shall stop writing and really get down to some hard work again today; one thing about me is still so silly – when I do something I always want someone to notice it and say something about it, and I mustn’t; I must do it because it’s right and not for approval. Philip would certainly say that, too.
I can’t write for long, but all the same I must just think for a moment about how I’ve been recently. My diligence began to wane a little bit or rather it came about because of going out (what a wonderful day in IJmuiden last week, oh, how much I love the sea), but since yesterday evening everything is all right again. I never used to see the point of the stage, it’s just for entertainment, I thought, but not for the improvement of people, foolishness; now, however, I think differently. “Liefdadige Dames” has converted me. I felt awful this morning; how base and bad and nasty I am compared e.g. with that Martha, who always just works for her sisters and her brother and is so kind to everyone, and that Major, oh, then you feel so small, so very small, but I shall try even harder to do my best never to do or think anything base or ignoble. E.g. when Breg told me just now that they’re going to take their English examinations, I immediately thought: oh, I shall really get down to work now, I want to get there now, but that’s very nasty in itself, because I would only be doing it out of jealousy. I shall now try to suppress that ugly thought (it just suddenly occurred to me) as much as possible because it’s ignoble.
And then that piece I translated not long ago. It will never do to be idle, oh, it’s completely true, I’ve discovered it in the last two weeks, laziness is the cause of all evil, then you start thinking about all sorts of foolish things and that’s unpleasant. So just be very industrious – – and kind (always as much as possible).
I haven’t had time to write recently because I’ve been working really hard for the English examination. Oh, if only I’d done it a bit sooner, I might have passed and now I’m terribly worried. I would be mortified to fail, but actually that’s only pride, nothing else. Anyway, a few more days and it will be definite.
The time has passed quickly with all that work; I feel really rather nice and cheerful, and hope to carry on the same way. How I enjoyed yesterday evening again, I’ve never seen anything so beautiful as Bouwmeester as Narciss; what depth and feeling there are in his voice, certainly something enthralling; oh, could anyone ever really be loved as he loves Jeannette? And then that prayer! That certainty that there above the stars sits enthroned a being that shaped us, not just to get through life as well or as ill as we can, but certainly to fulfil our calling here. Oh, sometimes I can be so sad when I think, where is my childlike faith (childish perhaps), my firm trust in God? I used to pray every evening and now – I forget every time, I can’t do it any more. And yet there are moments when I see that glorious sun and the flowers and everything so splendid and lovely, then I feel something inside me, an indescribable feeling, but one of well-being; it does me such good, it is as if my heart warms, or new life flows into me. Oh, I believe such moments are more than a prayer; then my eyes fill with tears and all I can say, or rather stammer, is: oh Lord, have mercy on me, help me to be good. But those moments are rare and don’t last long.
I’m really longing for a letter from Dries, poor boy; if only I had money I’d pay for him to study, but would that make him happy? What should he do now? I just don’t know. Surely he can’t spend his whole life doing something he doesn’t want to do? Once I’ve done a lot of examinations, and I can teach, I shall save everything for him, then perhaps he’ll still be able to study later. 
The examination is over and I passed. For so long beforehand I worried about it and hoped and feared, and now, now everything has turned out well, I’m so calm about it, so very different from what I’d thought, not half as cheerful as I ought to be. I prayed so hard to God beforehand and now it’s turned out well I have thanked him for it just as devoutly. But it’s because of that engagement of Piet’s, poor Mien; if only I could do something to comfort her. Oh, is there anything more dreadful than to see someone you love, whom you want so much to protect from any suffering, to see them suffer and not be able to do anything about it. It sometimes makes me despair when she laughs so bitterly and says: I’m laughing at all love, and then that despair again. Does she have such pretty hands as me; he was always so proud of them. Oh Piet, I had never thought, is that all your love for Mien? But she’ll get over it, after all she didn’t love him, but I have very little hope for Philip now. It’s an empty feeling now that the examination is over and done with, now I shall just rest for a few days and then get down to it again. I hope in heaven’s name that I shan’t get into such an unpleasant mood again. No, I don’t want to; I shall resist it.
It is a long time since I have written, but the reason is that nothing eventful has happened or rather (for such very eventful things never happen in my life) my life has glided on so calmly and peacefully that I had no desire whatever to write. What have I been doing these days? I really do not remember it. I have performed small household duties. I have walked, paid some visits to old schoolfellows, in short I have rather enjoyed my life, for during a long time I had never been at liberty to do what I pleased with school and other lessons, that I enjoyed it much. But I should not like to do so for very long, and before we begin to study for our real examination I will really try to learn many things, such as sewing etc., for which it is now just the right time.
To-day I am very dissatisfied with myself, I have been to church, it is true, but it has not done me much good, either I did not pay not sufficient attention or the sermon was not so good as usual, it left me quite cool, it did not move me and that is what I want. Then I was unkind this morning to everyone, in fact I was rather out of temper but I will try to make amends for the badly spent morning by a well spent evening. Oh if I were but always master over myself, over my passions, my self-will – and I never am.
I have been reading a good deal to-day. My novel interests me very much and I have a great respect for Bulwer – for being able to introduce so many and such well-drawn characters in one book. It is difficult to delineate one character in a book either of a hero or heroine, but in this book there are so many and they are so taken from nature that I really live with them. I think I like best the old Squire with his somewhat blunt manners and his kind, honest heart. He is not learned, nor wise but still what a contrast he forms and in his favour to the shrewd, cunning, false Randal Leslie. I do not think such false characters exist in real life, they are not clever enough, so most vices arise, according to my opinion, from indifference. People are indifferent to everything, proofs of great mental courage are condemned as foolish if they do not bring profit to him who performs them, but I think I will put a stop to this long, tedious reflection upon other man’s vices; first I myself must try to become noble in every word as well as action and oh how often I have nasty, jealous thoughts in my mind, but I will try to amend. Oh how I should like to know what will happen to me, shall I always remain as I am now, or will the great passion that stirs all human hearts visit me also, shall I know Love? But oh it can bring me as much grief as joy, who knows what it is in store for me. And whilst I write this, I see always the same thing, the dark passionate eyes, the black hair, the, no I do not know the right word for his stature but it does not matter, surely this cannot be love, I never heard his voice. I know nothing of him, and yet I know he is good, noble and true, how could he be otherwise with such eyes! Nay it is foolish of me to think so, perhaps in this very moment his thoughts are turning towards the small grave in the church-yard where all his hope and love are buried, yes one thing is common to us both, my thoughts also rest with that grave, my eyes fill with tears when thinking of her, we both knew and loved her.
It’s my th birthday today. In the past, when I was very little, I always imagined that when I turned a great deal would already have happened to me, but now I have, I feel exactly the same as I did when I turned . No, actually not quite; I do feel a bit older and it’s a wonderful feeling to realize that you’re beginning to become a person. I shall do my best to become a bit kinder and better this year and, particularly, steadier.
I’ve had a very sweet letter from Dries, oh, such a sweet, affectionate letter; if only he were here! Lena also came to see me, very affectionate, but now I must go downstairs, because the 
I’m starting to work again today, which says it all. My mood changes about every half an hour, so I just won’t talk about it; I wish Marie would get better.
“God reigneth” keeps ringing in my ears, and every time I hear this, I feel something of the impression that Valès made on me yesterday evening. That quiet, peaceful little church, the soft lamplight shining on his face and as it were casting a glow of glorification on it, but above all his simple, profoundly felt words; altogether it made me feel peaceful and calm, melancholy, too, for my eyes often filled with tears – but it was more due to my own wickedness. For every man shall bear his own burden, rang out sadly and I wanted to add, except for me, I’m so privileged that I’ve never really known true sorrow, at least not what one could call a “burden”; how happy and grateful I should actually be, and how ungrateful I am.
I have such a weak character, or rather, I must always be so under the influence of something or other fine that I’ve heard, read or seen; oh, at such a moment I could move mountains, I feel as if I could conquer the whole world, but as soon as the influence is past, the spell is broken – that’s the end of my goodness. I’m well aware that this has to change; but I so need someone who helps me and shows me the way, and I don’t have anyone. Oh, if only Dries were here now; he is older and further than me and moreover he knows me through and through and we can always tell each other everything, everything, and I can’t do that with anyone else in the world, for Anne is too childish and Marie is as far as I am; she’s wandering and searching too, and yet, oh, if only Dries were here, how much more use we should be to one another, much more than before, because we are both older and have become more serious. It’s certain that one only recognizes the great value of something when one has lost it.
How lovely it is to take an hour now and then, not to indulge in reflections, because that gets a bit sentimental, but to read something good, that’s why I’m glad that I’ve started to write out all the fine snippets, then I can delight in them now and then and it makes me more cheerful and happier, at least this evening. Oh, may I always possess this peace, this inner peace of mind that makes life shine so wonderfully and sweetly at some moments – and sometimes it seems to me so sombre and difficult. But not this evening.
Now I see for the first time the point of having kept a diary, for when I chance to glance at what I wrote last time, I suddenly feel much happier; it’s as if peace comes over me and at that very moment I was so dissatisfied because I don’t have anything pleasant to think about in the future. But that’s just what I have to learn, to be reconciled with myself, then I shall always be happy, whatever the circumstances. I haven’t had much to write about recently; the days pass very calmly, and I – do my best but fail miserably, usually. But: Do not despair.
How fast time passes when you’re doing something. I worked like a horse this morning. I made beds, dusted, scrubbed etc. but it was an effort, and I just read Lena’s letter in which she says she could write a book on clumsiness in ten cantos! I might be able to do it too.
I’ve just looked at the portraits of Mien and of Dries and now I’m going to start again with renewed courage. I shall try to persist in my good mood all day.
I’m sad today, without knowing why. “It’s the old story.” I wish it was summer, outside as well as in my heart, and it’s winter, miserable, bleak winter.
I actually wanted to complain a bit, in a sad mood, but while I leafed through the previous pages, a better mood came over me. I can’t look back on my day with great satisfaction because I’ve been grumpy and bad-tempered, but oh, it is so difficult to be good-humoured and cheerful all the time, it goes well in fits and starts, but sometimes – – –
This afternoon I stood at the window for a moment and saw the most beautiful sunset; little pink and red clouds drifted in the sky and between them the palest sky blue conceivable – and it did me good when I saw it; then I really felt what an effect seeing something beautiful can have on someone .
I turned my gaze away for a moment. I was knitting and I looked at my work and lo, when I raised my eyes again all those glorious colours had disappeared; all I saw was a uniform dark grey sky, without a single star, without one single bright cloud to break the monotony. And yet it was the same sky.– Oh, that’s also the way it is in life; it can be so glorious, so magnificent, so full of scents and colours, there can be such lovely stars shining, which light it up and cast their friendly radiance over it, and some lives are warmed and lit by the glow of a fiery, all-powerful Sun – but there are also lives that are as cold and colourless as the dark sky above me. What will mine be?– But even if the sun of happiness is lacking, the lovely stars of Hope and Faith can shine on everyone, if people want them to. And I shall do my best to that end.
Now I’ve read Margarethe’s diary in the Sabbath des Levens, I feel for the first time what is missing in mine; after all, she has a monotonous life, too, and yet she knows exactly how to express everything that’s going on in her head. 
They often talk about self-knowledge, but I don’t believe that I will ever get to know myself, for I don’t know what I’m like; sometimes I think I’m very steady and prosaic, then terribly fickle and very sentimental. I’m not the same two days in a row, sometimes my ideal is a life of calm, domestic happiness, then again I imagine all sorts of impossible things and want to be a writer, poetess or actress. I’m sometimes convinced that I have absolutely no character at all, but that is foolishness, I should rather say: I don’t know what the prevailing tone of it is.
Rie and I have started to learn Latin; if anyone had predicted this last year I would have thought it was impossible, and yet now it’s true. I find it desperately difficult, however, and I don’t think I shall ever learn it. I wish that I knew Gidius a bit better and was more uninhibited with him, then it would be better. Fired by Marie’s example, I’ve decided to work very diligently and read a lot, so I shall no longer occupy my time writing for it would just be nonsense anyway, squared. What does he think of me? Very boring and insignificant? Certainly.
Yesterday evening I was in Toonkunst for the first time, but I doubt whether I did the music justice: he was there, and whether I wanted to or not, I had to keep looking at him. Oh, I wish I knew what it is, that indescribable feeling every time see him, it’s as if everything inside turns over; I can’t find the words for it. It can’t be love, after all, I’ve never spoken to him; and yet it seems to me that I know him through and through or I know everything that goes on in his head. I had such a heavenly dream last night; I don’t know what it was, but when I woke up this morning, I had such a wonderful feeling; and now I feel so lonely, so unhappy.
How foolish I am – and during the week I assured Lena that I don’t write nonsense in my diary; but come, let me do my best to shake off my bad mood. Even though it’s raining outside, it must and will brighten up inside.
I don’t know how it happens, but when I sit down to write it’s as if every thought suddenly deserts me and I don’t know what to write; and sometimes my head is so full of all sorts of things. I haven’t found the right way yet, nor yet struck the right note, for I wager if someone ever leafed through this book, he would get the wrong impression of my character. I need to read a good, sound, fine book, but I’m so busy at the moment that there’s almost no time to read. It will be better once Christmas is over.
This wonderful Christmastide, there is something so solemn, impressive about it. I think it must be glorious in the countryside. I should like to do what Dries did last year in Germany, walk through the snow in the dark in the evening along a lonely road to the quiet village church and be uplifted and comforted there.
But still, I shall do my best to fill my heart with this blessed, holy peace. I shall do my best to celebrate a good Christmas in truth.
Christmas Eve! There’s no snow on the street outside, there’s no clear starry sky and lovely moonlight, the remarkable beauty of this night – and yet I have such a holy, solemn feeling. I can understand why the Catholics go to church at night; how impressive that must be. Oh, may a holy spirit of love and peace come over us all and help us spend a good Christmas. I want to do my best, at least.
I haven’t even written to Dries and yet he is constantly in my thoughts; we always used to go to church together; when might we do that again?
And Mien, how is she celebrating Christmas in Heaven? Oh, perhaps she’s looking down on us with love and friendship, perhaps she’s doing her best to make me better, perhaps she’s feeling sorry for poor, wicked Jo, who is still so far away from the right path!
New Year’s Eve! And yet I’m not in the mood for it. I always used to feel very different on an evening like this. Then I’d go to church with Dries first, and then we would walk home together so companionably, making all sorts of plans and thinking up good resolutions. And now I haven’t even been to church, and if I think back over the recent past, it’s with remorse, with bitter dissatisfaction with myself. Oh, when I think of the words that I chose as a motto for this book I feel so bitterly ashamed of myself; instead of “farther” it seems more as if I’m going backwards. Oh, may I leave all my bad habits and thoughts, all my foolishness, all my vanity behind in the old year. May I begin the New Year full of new courage, full of new good resolutions, oh, Father who lives in Heaven, forgive me yet again my many sins and be near to us in the new year with your Holy Spirit. Oh, I don’t ask that it may be a happy year, but I ask for help, for strength to do what is right, then I am happy, oh Father, be close to us. Amen.
Oh, I feel so heavy-hearted, so sad this evening; if only Dries were here, if ever anything happened to him! It’s true, it was imprudent of him to let that strange man in, but it does show his good heart. If he’d spent the money on his own pleasure, no one would have said anything about it, but now he’s given it to a poor man he’s called a fool. Oh Dries, if only I could be with you; if only he’s careful enough, for that man could lay hands on him. How often have I made myself unhappy about nothing, and now there really is a reason for fear and concern, now I realize how stupid and wrong it was!
But still, what a good reason I have to be proud of him, he is so noble, so generous; oh God won’t let anything bad happen to him, for it was good of him.– I wouldn’t have done that, I would have been afraid.
I couldn’t write this evening, my head is in such turmoil. What has become of my good resolutions on New Year’s Day?
Yesterday evening after the Latin lesson I walked home very agreeably with Gidius. I haven’t spoken to anyone so agreeably for a long time. He often really reminds me of Dries, as passionate and fervent, but Dries is more robust. We talked about writing diaries, and he advised me to be sure to write down all the little things. Not trivialities, of course, but various things you’ve seen. I can’t do that, though, I’d rather write about more abstract things, my mood, my feelings, or about what I’ve read. Then I’ll get into the way of it and learn to account for why I think something’s good; that’s useful too.
The sun is shining so brightly today, as it hasn’t done for ages. I’m going to Sem’s this afternoon, which means a long walk, lovely, get a breath of fresh air.
I did that long walk on Friday and went to the churchyard; oh how pleasant, how peaceful, how quiet it was there; I picked an ivy leaf from her grave.
I shall try to write down something of Magnin’s sermon this morning; it was so fine, but this afternoon a lot of that impression faded because of the skating, and still I don’t want to forget it. His text was “Unto every one which hath shall be given; and from him that hath not, even that he hath shall be taken away from him” and I must confess that at first it struck me as obscure and incomprehensible. He began by saying that every person is given two great treasures at the start of his life; first a certain number of days, months and years, in short his whole life, which he has in his own hands, which he must spend usefully, (and, he said, how much of it is spent uselessly on “frivolous conversation”, on “light reading”, oh, let me do my best to spend my time usefully), and secondly one gets an “intellectual treasure” that one must develop and cultivate. He insisted particularly on this for, as Dries always says, ‘stagnation means decline’ and the conscience, in particular, if one does not examine it closely all the time, weakens so quickly, and then there is a decline, a moral decline of which our family members and friends who surround us observe nothing, indeed we sometimes don’t even know it ourselves, and that makes it all the more dangerous. And when he said that, I felt so ashamed, so deeply ashamed, for oh, I believe that such a decline has taken place in me; I feel that I am no longer as I was, let me still do my best to go forward again. I believe that my greatest fault is selfishness, I always think about myself and much too little about others. Tomorrow I shall make a start on all sorts of little things here for the children, or fetch something from upstairs for someone. Those are the sort of things that my “slothful nature”, as Dries called it, always resists. If only he were here to help me and advise me; how generous and noble he is. Oh, how that letter from that poor man must have done him good. How wonderful it must be to have that conviction, to know that you have done something genuinely great and good. Magnin also said that even if you only had one hour left to live, you could spend that hour such that it became of greater value than the whole of your life up to then. One could rectify a wrong one had done, extend the hand of reconciliation to a brother, perform a great act of self-sacrifice. And oh, how comforting this sounds, particularly for old people. It seems to me that if I was old it would be a wonderful idea, for I would most probably think: “what use am I, my life is over”, and yet he said that one must never think that.
This afternoon I skated with Kobus, but it was very nasty of me not to skate at all with Jo or Mien, that was selfish again. And on the other hand, what a sweet, self-sacrificing note from Anne. What a good, kind heart she has. Oh, I’ve often failed to appreciate her, for the fact that she gave me her skates was kind, but the way she gave them was even kinder.
Uncle Wim has died. It was talked about so long beforehand, longed for so often, and now that it’s happened, it’s strange and unpleasant. Oh, how well I can understand that Jo was still very sad. As she says, one doesn’t think of recent times, but of the past, when he was still different, and then the dismal idea that one will never, never see him again. Oh, of all the mysteries in life, death is the greatest. We saw him once more this afternoon. It was moving when Jan unlocked the door of the little room. There is something solemn, something impressive about the look of death, and he looked so kind, so gentle and yet so suffering, so worried. Jo said it’s as if he’s thinking: I have suffered much, but now I’m there. What will Dries say about it? His last words to him were: God be with you, oh may that always be so. I’ve learnt one thing from it, to be kind to everyone for oh, ‘The hour will come, the hour is approaching when thou’lt stand and mourn by graves’. I shall also be nicer to Aunt Net. If she died I would be sorry, because now I think that if she were ill, I would look after her nicely and well; but she could also die suddenly and then I should be so sorry. Oh Lord, help us to be good.
What shall I write? I wanted to yesterday evening, I longed to, but there wasn’t an opportunity then, and now – my inspiration’s dried up. I shall just try to write down what has happened regularly. How I should like to get a look at Gidius’s diary, not out of curiosity but just to see how he does it, in what way. It will certainly be a bit sentimental, and full of Marie, of course. I should love to know if it’s really true that he loves her so much; although Marie swears the opposite, I firmly believe it. Wednesday afternoon, when we went home together, he frightened me to death and made me afraid for Marie; could she really be as ill as all that? I don’t believe it. It would be good, though, to consult a specialist. It’s always better late than never, but I can’t possibly say that to her father or mother; he can do it much better. The only thing in my power is to be as kind to Marie as possible, and to see to it that she stays at home in the evening; we have now arranged to read Goethe’s Tasso, and then we shall think of something else. I just hope that she won’t find it too boring. I wish I was better at reading aloud.
I’m really busy at the moment. For one thing, I’m doing as much as possible in the house, even though it’s not much. I do what I can for little Wim, (I have to spend more time with Beb, particularly with her schoolwork, because she’s not making much progress), then I translate a piece from the Family but it will never be published, I have a premonition about it. Then there’s the English lesson, for which I’m actually not working all that hard, and the Latin lesson. I must also play the piano a bit again, I must call on Anne soon, we’re supposed to start reading Max Havelaar together, so for the time being I have plenty to do if I can only carry it out.
A letter came yesterday, saying that Philip is engaged. How can that be? I have to say it’s beyond me. Less than five months ago ..... and now so soon. I pity the poor girl, forshe is actually being deceived; how can he profess his love for her while he’s still thinking about Mien? Poor Mien, I wish there was something I could do for her to make her happy, because I know she’s unhappy, she said so herself this morning. If only someone would come whom she could really love a lot; for my part I don’t care what happens to me. I’d far rather be unhappy myself than see her unhappy; perhaps if we ever got to know Leyds, it seems to me that she would love him, and she’s called Mien too. Oh, these last few days my thoughts keep drifting back to that silent place in the churchyard; poor darling, at least she’s at peace. And we – – life is so difficult, we must always struggle; oh, may I do everything to make Mien happier.
I’m very unhappy this evening in particular, but I want to resist it. Oh, that nameless, empty, disappointing feeling, what is it, in fact? I think it’s actually dissatisfaction with myself; I should actually have gone to look after Aunt Net this evening. It’s very nasty of me not to have done it. Gidius says one must have self-knowledge, but what good does it do to know how bad one is. And I’m very bad!
I went to Toonkunst yesterday evening and saw him there. He was standing only a few paces away from me, but he didn’t recognize me, or at least he didn’t acknowledge me. Oh, what was in his mind when he stood there leaning against the wall, head thrown back, listening to the music? Might he have been thinking of Mien? But I don’t want to think about it any more.
If my eye’s better tomorrow, I shall get back down to work; I’ve a lot to catch up. I’m also going to write to Dries tomorrow; oh, I long for him so much.
It’s the anniversary of Mien’s death today. When I came back from the churchyard, I ran into her mother with Lot. I would have liked to speak to her, but I didn’t really dare. What a sad day it will be for her! Could Mien feel that we think about her constantly? There were fresh wreaths on the grave; might there be one from him among them? Oh, it was so quiet, so peaceful in the churchyard. I thought to myself that it mustn’t be too awful to lie there so still and calm beneath the earth, lit by the sunshine, by the friendly radiance of the silver moon. I prayed by her grave that I might become better.– – – –
– – – – And it has helped me, for at least if I look back now at the day that has passed, I can be a little bit satisfied with myself; at least I did what I could this morning, but I should actually do that every day. That’s another of my faults, that I’m so easily satisfied with myself. With the least thing I do, I think it’s already a great deal. When I compare it with what Lien always does, or how much Antoinette does at home and is always friendly and cheerful, then I actually don’t do anything; but I will do my best now. Never before have I sat so calmly and at ease writing my diary in the sitting room: I must say I like it. They’re all out this evening and I’ve stayed with the children. As he went to bed, little Wim said: “I can’t contain myself; I’ve had such a nice evening.” How easy it is to please a child. I didn’t actually do anything for them, just told them a couple of fairy tales, and yet they were so happy. Thankfully I’m also on good terms with Anne again; we’re going to church together tomorrow, with Ka Boot. What a hilarious person she is, just like someone in a book; I hope that I’ll stay just as good-humoured and cheerful and jolly when I’m old. She certainly does a lot of good, if only because of her cheeriness. I’m sometimes so afraid that the older I get, the more taciturn and duller I will become, until I end up becoming a tiresome person or e.g. like Aunt Net, so difficult and demanding. Heaven preserve me from it!
I shall be glad when my eye is completely better again. I haven’t read anything worth mentioning all this time. I’m longing to read a really good, substantial book again. I shall read nothing but good, fine things, I’ve resolved no more of those silly, trifling little novels. Oh, if only I could just write something myself, but my ideas are too confused. I could write a few bits and pieces, but not a proper story; my ideas are too vague for that. I should so like to read something by Gidius, to see what it is like. He’s actually the same sort of young man as Dries; why isn’t everyone like that? Of course, I don’t mean exactly like that, but if e.g. I say something to Willem or Jo or someone else about a good book or the like, I’m ridiculed straight away – oh, that’s something out of books, real life isn’t like that etc. etc., and yet they’re wrong, life is like that (things that are just as romantic and tragic as in books do happen, but in reality they’re even sadder, even more tragic).
 But to get back to Gidius, I can really talk very agreeably with him. I wish he came to our house, that we knew him well, I would like that better than always that boring Willem Häberling or Toon. Writing isn’t going as easily as I’d thought. Today I’ve been a prosaic housewife, so I shall stop writing and go and mend Pa’s gloves instead.
I’ve just leafed through the previous pages and it’s cheered me up; I’ve been writing my diary for almost a year now.
This afternoon I walked home with Gidius as usual, but it wasn’t pleasant at all. He made me feel sad and miserable; when he becomes so very learned I can’t talk to him and I can’t combat his unbelief, no matter how much I want to. Sometimes I find him too heated and sometimes too coolly rational; this afternoon anyway, I didn’t agree with him at all. I shall go and learn my English grammar now, because I’m too put out to be able to write much. Oh, if only I could give expression, form to what resonates in my innermost self and can sometimes put me in such a wonderfully soft and gentle mood. I can hear the sounds of music from downstairs and they touch a chord in me, they arouse an inexpressible feeling in me.
It was as if I had a premonition that something sad would happen; when I came downstairs I found a note from Lena, a sad, profoundly distressed note saying that her engagement was off. Oh, how glad I was that I’d written to her; she needed a consoling, friendly word, someone she could pour out her heart to, and yesterday morning Marie and I resolved to be very kind to her and make up as much as possible for what she’s suffered. We talked seriously (we’ve known each other for a year now) and swore to be true, faithful friends; “let there be truth between us”. 
Yesterday evening we went to see Lena together, but didn’t find her as we’d expected; she was very calm, cheerful even, and the whole story she told us was flimsy and impossible. I don’t believe she loved him anything like as much as I thought; she was a bit disappointing. We agreed to read a good book together and to see one another a lot; I hope that we will teach one another to be good.
It’s lovely weather today, the friendly sunshine has cheered me up no end.
Gidius wants to come and visit us to meet Pa and Ma. I’m pleased on the one hand, but all the same I have to laugh about it, I think it’s a bit scary.
A letter from Dries has just come, but it wasn’t a cheerful one. I think his pleasure in the soirée had already worn off. Oh, if only I could just go to him now, could just speak to him for a moment. He says not a word about my excited letter about Max Havelaar; I’m disappointed.
I heard a splendid sermon by Haverschmidt this morning; there were the three of us: Marie, Lena and me. (I do like Marie more, I think.) He said that without pain and suffering no one can truly be a person, no victory without a battle and one must always do what is right and fair in small things as well as large, even if it goes against our desire or inclination. And how difficult that is.
Bouwmeester was splendid as Matroos yesterday evening, magnificent. Oh, if only I could talk to him, if I could just tell him how much I admire him. But he must surely be good as a person, too, otherwise he couldn’t act like that.
I had a horrible day today because I had dreadful cramps and so I couldn’t do anything. And anyway I’m not satisfied with anything over the past week; I must try harder to do my best.
Dries’s letter wasn’t very cheerful. I shall write to him again tomorrow, but he didn’t answer my last letter. Mien has gone to eat at Aunt Mien’s today. Oh, I wish Willem loved her; perhaps she would be happy then, and now she’s so dejected, so sad sometimes. On Thursday evening I walked home with Gidius again and he came to call for me too; he was very nice. I’m sorry I can’t have a lesson on Wednesday, but I don’t want them to rearrange things for my sake because Eduard has such difficulty with his work. So not this week, I’m very sorry to say.
We’ve just come from church, because Marie was confirmed and I thought it would be unkind not to go, although it wasn’t really very good; what he said was sound enough, but what uplifted me most was the evening sun coming in through the church windows so beautifully, and when dusk slowly began to fall the light became dimmer and dimmer until eventually that part of the church was shrouded in a mysterious darkness. Oh, I so wanted to kneel and confess my guilt to God in profound humility. Oh, I feel it so clearly, however great my shortcomings, however much patience, however much love, however great a sense of duty and yet I feel it so clearly, that inner peace of mind, that calm repose of the soul which is actually the only thing that can make us happy on this earth, which one can only attain by living according to God’s commandment, by loving Him and one another. Oh, let me now again, for perhaps the thousandth time, solemnly resolve to be better, so that when I am confirmed myself I can make that promise of faith with a quieter conscience. It is a momentous point in a person’s life, may I now say farewell to all my follies and vanities for good.
We’ve had a lovely letter from Dries, so bright and cheerful, very different from last week. He wrote about his visit to Huet, who again received him with the utmost cordiality, and he also had a delightful talk with his wife; it made me happy to hear that to some extent at least she shares my opinion and doesn’t believe in Darwinism. Gidius wouldn’t think she was so very stupid. This afternoon, when I visited Marie, he came too; he had nearly come to us, but he didn’t because of his toothache; I wonder how that visit will end.
I began my diary a year ago yesterday; have I changed much in that time? Not much better, I think; but a little wiser, I hope. I went to Mignon on Friday and had a wonderful evening, but I didn’t deserve it for all afternoon I thought about nothing but my dress and how it would suit me. That was bad and vain.
I enjoyed Mignon; I also began to long for “the country where the orange tree blooms”, for the “blue sky” and all those glorious things, “God’s earth is so extraordinarily beautiful”. 
I’ve encountered a lot today, or rather thought a lot and experienced thousands of moods in this one day. I got a note from Gidius to say we didn’t have a lesson. I was very sorry at first, but not now. Then English lesson and a very nice talk with Marie, she really is very kind and good. Then I went to Artis with Aunt Net; oh, how neglectful I have been all these years, how much I have to make up to her and everyone. I shall write more about it tomorrow morning because Ma would like me to come downstairs now. Then I can start by writing about the Hoop der Onsterfelijkheid. 
I was so hard at work with Lien this morning that I didn’t have time to write; this afternoon first Lena came and then Anne, and now is the first quiet moment I’ve had all day. I would now like to reflect and write calmly, but it’s getting too dark. FirstI’m going to have a doze, then I shall write my letters and then my diary – the mirror of my inner life, to express it very beautifully for once.
I’ve written my letters, but it actually makes more sense after all just to work now and then cheer Aunt Net up a bit, because I’ve already written to Marie about Lena doing the Examination and I’m in a cheerful mood again.
I haven’t written anything for a great many days, and that’s not a good sign. I haven’t been well these last few days; but now it’s the evening before my confirmation and I want to reflect calmly. Van Gorkom said this afternoon that we would now become responsible, that we, the coming generation, would presently take the place of the elders, so that we had to be equal to taking on this task. And I want to do that now. I want to become freer, more independent in my thinking and oh, above all, do my best not to be influenced by all sorts of outside circumstances. I shan’t go out much because it’s not good for me, and instead work hard. I must become useful, for everyone at home too, and if only I could improve my temper!
I always used to think that I would really start doing my best a very long time before I was confirmed, but I haven’t done it. In my mind it’s as if tomorrow evening, should I happen to be sitting here again, I shall be a very different person, but that won’t happen; it will be the same. Still, I will have heard good, comforting words, perhaps a guide for my whole life. Oh, may I at least not be vain and not think about how I look because that’s what I’m afraid of – that that’s what I’ll do anyway.
Yesterday I read in the Family that this dreadful shyness of mine comes solely from vanity, that you always think about what impression you’re making on other people, and that’s true; may I resist it. Oh God, help me to keep all these resolutions, make me meek and lowly in heart. Help us, oh God. Amen.
Work and pray. 
Be lovable and thou shalt be loved. Oh Lord, may I follow thee all my days; Lord, forgive us our trespasses, bless us. Amen. 
Oh, while I read these words again, I feel such bitter remorse, such intense contrition; wat has become of my good intentions, how little thought I’ve given them, what a trifling impression everything made on me. The last few days I’ve been dissatisfied and grumpy again; may I resist it now. I’ve been so selfish recently; I constantly think only of my own pleasure and so little about the others.
I had a lovely evening on Sunday. To start with the piece was very good, there were a whole lot of us and we had a lot of fun and in the end I had a lovely walk home with Gidius. He’s very nice, to be sure; at least we talked very pleasantly together. The lesson yesterday afternoon was hugely entertaining, too, and we went home together again, but I believe I’m thinking about him a bit too much; that’s silly. He promised me a verse in my album, and on Sunday afternoon we’re going to the park to hear the Berlioz symphony. Oh, that’s why I like talking to him so much, because he understands me so well, and that is so wonderful. Now I must get down to work; I could keep wool-gathering all evening.
I’ve just found Dries’s English essays. I’m going to read them through again. I’ve had an extremely sweet, affectionate letter from him; on the very day I had to go to Communion, I was profoundly touched by it, but it lasted such a short time!
We may be going to the rehearsal of Elias tomorrow evening – wonderful! I really do have a wonderful life, I have something nice so often, when I consider how many people there are who almost never have anything nice. I’ve finished my essay on the Lady of the Lake now, so at least done something; let me at least do my best to become a bit cleverer, I must do a lot of work.
This evening Anne and I visited Miss Giesse to congratulate her on her award. It was very convivial, we had a very enjoyable talk, also with Miss Wolff, a very smart, lively Jewess, decidedly witty. And yesterday evening I was at Lena’s, for Marie wasn’t allowed to go again. We talked together very confidentially and also laughed a lot because I found an old exercise book with all sorts of stories by her, things like Trahi!! Sanne!! etc. Then we went downstairs and played some music, very pleasant. But that brother of hers is a rude, churlish boy; he never opens his mouth.
I’ve haven’t been at all nice again today; first I was unkind to Aunt Net and just now to Lien. I’m so very sorry; I must take better care tomorrow.
I’ve made up with Aunt Net again. I shall now do my best to stop getting angry with her and perhaps cheer her up a bit in the last years of her life; then at least I’ll have done something in my life. I was just talking to Gidius about it this afternoon, about seeking and finding a goal in life; he just sayskeep on searching, searching, but that’s precisely the difficulty. Since a short while ago, be it months or weeks, I’ve developed a little independence of mind, I’ve learnt to think about everything, and still I come to the conclusion that I don’t know anything. But I’ve still got to learn my grammar and it’s Mien’s birthday today, so they would prefer me to go downstairs. Perhaps I’ll find time to return to this tomorrow. Above all, let me do my best to live a good life, that is: for others.
If I could write down what’s been going on in my head these last two days, I could fill volumes. This afternoon I had a very pleasant talk with Marie but we didn’t do any work. We have sworn eternal loyalty to one another, however ugly those words may sound, it’s heartfelt; I sometimes see something in Marie that I don’t really care for, and she will often think the same about me, of course, but I like her very much, I couldn’t [get along without her / let her go[?]. I believe she knows every thought I have, and moreover we must always have more and more of a good influence on one another.
I’m in such a foolish mood today. Marie and I laughed like a pair of silly children, but it does us good.
I had two nice days this week; Tuesday with Anne and yesterday with Rie, when we went to the theatre together, very good. I was sorry at first that Gidius didn’t come with us, but later I stopped caring. The weather is lovely, so I feel very good.
I took Anne to the train this morning because she’s going to stay in Arnhem, and while I was there I spoke to Mr and Mrs ten Brummelen, who were very friendly. She, in particular, is always very straightforward, and that’s the most attractive thing, after all.
Pa has gone to Paris, so it’s very quiet here. How they’ll enjoy themselves together.Yesterday we had a reading evening again and finished reading the Harzreise. I wish we knew of another good book now, a solid work. I must go and learn my English grammar now; I really must work hard because we have to send our papers in in June.
What a wonderful thing work is. It refreshes a person completely, for I was actually a bit miserable at first. This evening I did my Latin translation, then answered Anne’s sweet letter that came this morning. How affectionate and sweet she always is!
I walked home with Gidius again yesterday evening. It’s getting a bit dangerous, I like him very much. He said I could sometimes be so naïve, what is naïve actually? And I’m very like a friend of his, Van Eeden or something of the kind; I’d really like to know what this gentleman is actually like. He’s finished the verse for my album, so I shall take it with me on Wednesday; I’m really looking forward to it. He said I should also look up as I passed, but I don’t dare; what does it matter to him, anyway? 
The world can sometimes frighten me so, I can’t find my place in it. It seems as if everything is in a muddle. Let me just get down to work! Oh, I envy those calm, even-tempered people, who never think, never feel anything, are never unhappy.
Kenelm Chillingly is the best book I know; Gidius really must read it, I shall be interested to hear what he thinks of it. Last night I dreamt of our dear Mien; oh, dearest, if only I could follow your example, if only I were calmer and more contented. But I can’t do it, so many images rise up in me, I would like to do so much, I should very much like to discover how rich and full and wonderful life really is, I should – – – and I can’t do anything, I can’t even work because there’s no one who helps and teaches me, and I don’t know enough on my own. Pa says that Dries is so clever, so abreast of everything. I envy him, if only he were here again, what a wonderful life we could have. I always feel as if I’m only half, so empty and dissatisfied. But that’s dissatisfaction with myself, I must become better, oh, if only I were not so vain and petty, I want to be free, I want to lift myself free of all this human triviality and pettiness; I want to be in control of myself, not hunting for pleasure that isn’t to be found anyway, but live free and independent.
I’ve read Milton’s Allegro and Il Penseroso, I’d rather live with the latter. 
I want to try to write down my confession of faith, as best I can, for I’ve just read a book about it, which doesn’t satisfy me but still did me good. I maintain that people talk and moan about it too much, they use too many long words without realizing that anyway it just comes down to the application to your own life.
I have lost much of my faith, my childish simple faith. When I pray, I sometimes don’t know who I’m talking to. I can’t always imagine God, but still, to say: I don’t believe in a God any more, no, never that.


Who dares to claim
That he believes in God?
And whose heart is so dead
That he has ever boldly said: 
No, I do not believe? 

There is something higher than mankind. There are higher powers, spirits or one power, one spirit, but who can say? After all, these are the mysteries of life. But still, the light, the heavenly, divine light “is it not God’s breath?” and the glorious, pure feeling that can sometimes make the chest swell, that can set us aglow and flow through us, that we can as it were fathom the whole world, even eternity, in an instant, isn’t that a spark of the divine in our heart? I can understand that someone sitting in his cramped room, overcome and overwhelmed by fear and doubt, confused and hard pressed by all sorts of propositions and arguments by philosophers, might say: there is no God, but go outside into the wonderful fresh air, let the mild spring coolness cool your heated forehead p. , enjoy the lovely scent of the flowers, the song of the birds, let the calm of the evening bring peace into your mind, is all that not just a foretaste of the divine, can a person in the world give you such pleasure, is that not holy, not divine? 
Yesterday evening we spent a few wonderful hours at Lena’s; I really enjoyed it. Her little room was cosier than ever, the trees in the garden were in full blossom, of course, there was a beautiful sunset, and we heard a clock chime in the distance every so often; I sat on the wide window seat, or rather half lay in it, Rie in the armchair beside me and Lena kneeling on the floor with her head on the window seat (her favourite position), and so we sat like graces, I don’t know who had the most graceful pose, and talked very comfortably and confidentially. Sometimes we sat silent for a while under the influence of the beautiful evening. Gradually the stars appeared in the sky, and the darker it got, the more confidential our conversation. It turned, of course, to “the eternal romance that every young girl imagines at our age” and I still have to laugh when I think how Lena just kept repeating, with a certainty that surprised me, that I must have a very nice man with sparkling or twinkling eyes (I can’t remember which), following that each time with very pleasant and cheerful, but I’d rather have a quieter one, because that’s what I am myself. Marie said: I could be a very good wife, my dear Rie, I love her so much. I hope she finds someone who loves her a lot and whom she loves a lot; she utterly deserves it and would be worthy of it.
I had a nice day with her on Sunday. If only I hadn’t been so shy, particularly in the evening at Brieke’s, where we all went together to taste some delicious wine, but I don’t really like it. Gidius brought me home and was very nice. I think that he pressed my hand between both of his when he left, but I could have imagined it.
It seems as if I forgot Mien’s birthday, but I didn’t. Very early yesterday morning, at eight o’clock, I was already at the churchyard and laid violets on her grave. That was my birthday present, my dearest!
How poorly I’m keeping up my diary. So much has happened recently, and I haven’t written any of it down. Gidius paid us a visit on Sunday last week, but the same evening his pa was taken very ill and the night before last he died. Poor Gidi, I’m so sorry for him; he loved him so deeply; he watched over him every night and took care of him faithfully and lovingly the whole time. It will come as a terrible blow to him. Yesterday evening I wrote a note right away, because I couldn’t send them a card after all; I just hope it didn’t sound silly, but it was so difficult. I’m sorry for Marie too, now that Anne van der Kop is finally coming to stay on Tuesday. It would have been much more convivial if Gidius could have been there all along and gone out with them; he had looked forward to it so much, as well.
We had a wonderful letter from Dries on Sunday, (he had been out with some English people and is going on a picnic tomorrow; I’m so pleased that he’s becoming cheerful and in good spirits again, just like his old self). I’ve had a wonderful letter from Anne; I must hurry up and answer her.
We have an English lesson soon, so I have to learn my Grammar.
Anne van der Kop has been staying with Marie since Tuesday and I’ve been with them a great deal. They came to fetch me straight away on Tuesday evening to go to the Vondelpark. It was the first time I saw Gidius again; he was very quiet and sad, of course. When we went home together on Wednesday, he thanked me for the note and said that it was very warm-hearted. I feel so sorry for him. We’ve also been to Artis, and to the Park, and yesterday morning to the Trippenhuis; but I can’t say I’ve got to know Anne. I think she’s nice and very clever, but she doesn’t appeal to me. Gidius has lent me the French Revolution by Carlyle, and now I’m going to read very thoroughly and at my leisure: self-cultivation and self-improvement. I mustn’t forget those two things.
 We’re going to Haarlem tomorrow, but if he doesn’t come too I shan’t really mind; and I’ll be anxious and shy – I know that in advance.
I must just write about Leijds (this is the first time I’ve written his name). I saw him in the week in a carriage with a garland around his hand, he had passed his examination; it struck us both as disagreeable.
Anne van der Kop is almost due to leave and I’m not sorry about it. It’s not that I don’t like her, but it’s more convivial at the Stumpffs without her. Mrs Stumpff is so extremely posh now. Marie’s going away too, a week from today. How will I manage without her? I had another sweet letter from Anne this morning. I wish she’d come back soon.
Yesterday we went to Zeeburg, but Gidius wasn’t very nice to me; when will I be able to speak to him alone again?
I have now solemnly sworn to work hard; I will pass the examination and not just English, but a lot more besides. I wish I had someone who gave me a bit of a helping hand, or lent me books. If only Dries were here, what a wonderful life we’d have.
Now I read over what I wrote about Anne, I don’t understand how I could have done that; I like her so much, or rather I’ve begun to like her so much now; she’s so reliable and spirited, and so sweet as well. I said goodbye to her yesterday afternoon and then went home with Gidius; he was very nice and we have sealed our friendship; I’ve never had a boy as a friend before, but it’s a wonderful feeling to know that there’s someone you can rely on; I know for sure that if I were ever unhappy or miserable he would help and support me. He also set all sorts of conditions: we must trust one another, tell one another the truth and always believe one another; he’ll come to see us again when Rie’s away.
Then I went to Artis yesterday evening and had a lovely walk with Anne. Oh, if only she lived here, what wonderful talks we could have together, but now, just when I began to really like her, she went away. We took her to the station this morning, she came with Rie and Nette, and Gidius was there too. We came back together again, it always seems so coincidental; he was very nice. Lena came to see me too yesterday afternoon. Poor girl, I feel very sorry for her and will do my best to be something for her; but I’m too childish and shallow myself; all the same, I’ll try. After all we must all try to be a good influence on one another.
Anne promised me she’d write; how wonderful that will be.
Marie came to say goodbye this afternoon because she’s going out of town with Mien for a month, to Mrs Trice. However shall I get through this month! If only I had something substantial to do. Oh, I’ve felt so miserable again the last few days, I long for Gidius all the time and of course I shall hardly see him now, no English lesson, no Latin lesson, no one to talk to. Marie away, Anne away, whatever shall I do with the time? Reform myself, it could be an ideal opportunity but alas, alas it still never happens. Where and when will I ultimately find peace, when shall I ever understand what life actually is?
I’m certainly not short of work, for Gidius has suggested I should do Latin translations, then he’ll check them. I’m going to do some other things, too; perhaps translate sermons by Bersier for Ma; that would be a good plan, and then I must also read a bit of English, so plenty of work. Lena and Gidius have been here this afternoon, but I didn’t enjoy it.
I’ve had lovely cheerful letters from Marie and from Anne; they’re both thoroughly enjoying themselves. Gidius came to see us on Friday evening, and I was at Mrs Stumpff’s yesterday, but he didn’t come all day. I get a note from him with every translation, for we always have something to say, but now I still have to get my Saturday translation back; I ran into him briefly then and gave him my work; perhaps he’ll bring it this evening when I’m out. Might he be cross with me? I constantly have this feeling that he is.
This evening I’m going to see Marie’s new piece; oh, how sad I am that she didn’t talk to me about the disappointment of “La papillone”, everyone could comfort her and I couldn’t – I, who love her so dearly; she shouldn’t have done that.
“In my heart lay a whole lake of tears bounded by silent desolation.” 
I still haven’t heard from Gidius, has he left town? Or is he cross with me? I don’t understand it at all. Once I’ve got it back I won’t be so quick to send another translation, at least not more than one a week, but I must still get this one back!
I’ve started to read Lothair by Disraeli, I don’t like it much so far.
I sometimes have such good intentions to learn a lot and to study, but I don’t know what to start on first. Well, I shall never be very clever anyway and I can’t cope well because I get so dizzy when I read for a long time. Gidius has gone away now, too, to Frankfurt. I wonder when I’ll get a letter from him; does he ever think about me?
Marie comes back a week tomorrow; I’m so pleased, but I don’t really feel like doing the examination.
I’m not going to write any more for a long time, I’m going to work hard for the examination, oh, how much time I’ve wasted. Only I just have to say that I had a lovely visit at Mrs Doorman’s yesterday.
What a gap in my diary! And yet an awful lot has happened in that time. Marie and Anne came back and Lena, at last, and I’m very glad. We see each other quite often, and yesterday evening we had our first meeting about the Christmas tree. Anne is full of enthusiasm and I’m keen, too; once the examination’s over and done with I shall also begin in good spirits. 
I’ve had a miserable time recently; no one knows what I’ve endured in those three weeks, but fortunately I feel that I’m gradually getting better. Once the examination’s over, I’m not going to read anything for a long time but just sew, knit and walk, then I shall recover completely. Marie told me yesterday evening that Gidius has come back, so we are up to full strength again.
I’m nineteen! I can’t quite grasp it as I write it down, but all the same I do feel that I’m beginning to get a bit older. I had a very nice birthday. I got a lot and everyone remembered me. I think Gidius is right when he says that I’m getting a bit spoilt; it’s very ungrateful of me when I sometimes feel so unhappy, for I’m so well off. Once that examination is done I shall begin again. I still have to write to Dries today as well; he wrote me such a sweet letter.
The examination is done and fortunately I passed, but Marie didn’t; oh I’m so terribly sorry for her, it’s spoilt all my pleasure. It’s like a dream that it’s over, those two days seemed to pass in a flash; what will Dries have to say about it? This afternoon I popped over to Marie’s, they were so bitterly disappointed!
Tomorrow I shall start to get back into my old routine; I shall continue working hard but I wish I could teach as well; anyway I shall discuss that later. Oh can I be thankful enough that everything is going so well. I shan’t get so miserable and gloomy any more – never again, I hope.
I’ve had a very sweet letter from Anne v.d. Kop and answered it straight away. Strange that I feel so attracted to her when I actually know her so little; I know I could say anything to her. How wonderful it would be if she lived here too, then we would really enjoy ourselves first and she would be a rod and staff for us because she’s older and wiser than us and has much more settled convictions. I hope she answers my letter soon. I’ve heard nothing from Gidius since my birthday ; I think it was very rude of him not to have come to congratulate Pa and Ma; it seems as if his friendship is already cooling a bit, or it was never really sincere in the first place.
Marie went to Rotterdam this morning, I hope it will do her good and that she’ll come home cheerful and in good spirits again. If only we could carry on working quietly as we did before. It’s been a wonderful year. I only appreciate how quickly it’s gone and enjoyable it was now it’s over: I should hate to have to study on my own now. We must talk about it as soon as Marie gets back.
Perhaps I’ll start teaching Betsy Brunt:t I’d enjoy it if she’s not too stupid; I would so like to earn my own money, then I’d really start to enjoy my life, if I had lots of useful work to do.
 I’ve been too busy to write down any of that beautiful sermon by Hooyer, it’s a shame that I remember so little of it. Tomorrow I’m going to Hugenholtz with Lena and will then try to write it down properly.
I’m disappointed with myself when I see all the gaps in my diary! Why didn’t I write anything all that time? In fact I haven’t done anything special in all that time since the examination, but such a life full of trivialities, I couldn’t endure it. Oh God, if life is nothing but mending stockings and washing up cups and doing the washing, what is the point of it? I should have lived in a different age; I’m not in my place here, I think, in our civilized nineteenth century. Of course I know that life hangs on a thread of small things, but surely it shouldn’t be so hollow, so meaningless. And therefore (I shall do my best to learn to darn and such things) I am going to just work and read a lot again; how much valuable time have I allowed to pass unused? And I still have so much to learn!
I read a fine article about Jacques Perk in the Spectator that reawakened my sense of the higher ideal of life, that made my see how honest and good life can be! Poor Perk, he will never have dreamed, never have thought, that someone who is such a perfect stranger to him as me, could ever dwell with him in thoughts and yet it is so. How often I have thought of him, how well I can imagine what he thought and felt. I’m very stupid and know almost nothing, and yet there is something in me that lets me understand the great minds, the geniuses. Not what they think up, not what they say, but I understand what drives them to say it; their notes make all the strings of my mind vibrate; oh, if only I had been given the gift of expressing what I feel!
The mysteries of life enmesh me more and more; I walk in darkness and, alas, do not seek the light enough. Oh God, since my belief in you has been shaken, since I no longer dare to turn to you childishly and trustingly, all my support is gone. For what purpose are we in the world? This question assails me from all sides and all the more fiercely when my thoughts are free all the time, there is nothing to which I have to devote myself with all my powers, or rather I haven’t done that recently, but it will change now.
Wandering we gain strength
And seeking we find the path. 
I’ve been sitting with my pen in my hand for a quarter of an hour and I don’t know where to start. I think that all possible elements are represented in me, anything could have grown out of me, I’m prosaic and sentimental,dreamy and practical at the same time; there is something in me that breaks down and something that builds up, and there is always conflict between these two minds! 
Herem I am in my little room, writing my diary by the light of a candle, all alone, in this great, immense city. I can’t fancy it to be true, neither that I don’t feel more strange and uncomfortable, but I think I am so much astonished to feel that I, who never was from home before, who never could do anything for myself and always wanted help and advice, now quite alone in a strange boarding-house in London! The fact is however that I have been very fortunate, and that people are very kind to me, especially Anni K. and Mary W. Without them I never should have got on as I did. And Mr v. B. too is “awfully kind” as Anni says. And though he is often shy and I can see on his face that he feels uncomfortable, without him I never should have seen what I saw already. Hyde Park and Regent Park and spent a whole day in the British Museum and only two days in London! I think I used my time rather well.
Now I am going to bed for it is past eleven. I only wanted to write a little introduction to my diary in which I shall try to write down no sentimentalism of any kind but my impressions about London so that my visit there may be no unfruitful one.– 
I spent the whole day in the Museum and after lunch even found my way there quite alone. I like it immensely to be there; every book that just comes into your mind you have at hand and can take; the chairs are very easy, the desk very large but the only thing is: people walk about and don’t keep quiet enough. But after all it is a nice place for study and I feel quite at home there already. I mean to study very hard and hope to get on well.
Dr Schmalz went away today for a trip to Wight, Anni is very sorry for it, I almost think she is in love with him, but I am glad, it is much nicer when he is away.
I saw this afternoon Oxford Street and Regent Street, the two principal streets of London I think. I was much astonished at the immense number of carriages and hansoms and I saw a few fine shops but nothing to get in ecstasies over yet. It is such a strange feeling to walk in the streets of London and to walk there so very much at my ease for Mr v. B. goes with me and he knows the way. I think it will now be time to go downstairs for tea. Miss Gard is gone out, so it will be rather quiet. Just an evening to write a long letter home. I wonder how they are getting on, my little boy above all, darling, if I could only give you a kiss, now good night my dear. I just fancy I am kneeling beside your little bed and softly kissing your hands. No, I won’t be silly any more.
I just ran home to fetch something from my room, in the silent hope of finding some letter. But there is none! how is it possible that they do not fancy how much I long for one. I’m almost a week gone and no one wrote to me. I shall grow homesick if they do like that. But I must run back to the Museum and work. Yesterday I saw nothing particular, only the shop of Shoolbred, an immense one where they sell almost everything. 
Wasn’t it kind of Miss Alice to bring me my letter in the Museum, Saturday morning? I was so glad, I think I almost wept for joy; letters from home are the most delicious things in the world. But I perceive that I’ve let several days go by without writing about anything I saw. I will just try and recollect what I have seen. In the first place there rises in my sight the beautiful Trafalgar Square with its fountains and lions; then Blackfriars Bridge and my first sight of the Thames, the Houses of Parliament and Westminster Abbey, that place is one of the most beautiful sights of London, methinks. Then I must not forget the Royal Academy with its beautiful pictures and the crowd of fashionable people before them. But the best and holiest thoughts come back to me when I think over our churchgoing to Mr Stopford Brooke yesterday night. The candles were lit and shed a soft light all over the little church, the congregation was but small, the choir of little boys sang sweetly and [all[?]n were kneeling down. I struggled to find back God and felt the holy calm influence of the place.
How the days run on. Now I’m here already more than a week but I don’t think I have seen much of London in these last days. I’m studying hard at the Museum or rather it looks like it but I have made no great progress till now. My hope for the examination sinks more and more. I’m too stupid to write much to-night.
I’ve been to see Sheridan’s Rivals to-night and enjoyed it ever so much. 
How lazy I am in writing. I let all my impressions fade away unnoticed. I have seen Sarah Bernhardt, a thing which otherwise I should have been raving about for days, but now I am not even enthusiastic about it. She is a beautiful woman, splendidly dressed; she is languissante, charmante, but not full of “high art” as I should like to call it. 
I cannot forget the holy impression which I received this morning at church. All was silent till suddenly the full sweet sounds of the organ filled the air and then rose a voice pure and deep as an angel’s and the meaning of the words sunk deep into my soul; refrain thy voice from weeping and thine eyes from tears for thy work shall be rewarded, saith the Lord. Words cannot give back the sweetness and heavenly inspiration of the music.
I took my diary with me to the Museum and shall try whether the Reading Room can give me sufficient inspiration to describe my delight at seeing the Merchant of Venice acted. How great, how immense a genius must Shakespeare have possessed, that still now after almost three centuries his work delights and attracts alike all nations. How well I remember the time, when I said that I could not understand how people always rave about Shakespeare. Now I have understood it and feel proud of it for it shows me that at least I have made some progress. The scene which struck me most was Portia in the habit of a young barrister, her hands lifted up to heaven, exclaiming in her sweet tender voice.


The quality of mercy is not strained
It droppeth as the gentle rain from heaven
Upon the place beneath..... 

The scenery was splendid and I do not think it will be easy to efface from my memory that sight of Venice with its palaces and terraces and gondolas and masques and splendour and luxury. I am very glad I saw it.
What tremendous gaps in my diary! Not even the visit to the National Gallery noted. We saw there an immense number of pictures, some of them very beautiful. Those I remember best are: Landseer’s dogs, Reynolds’ angels, his portrait of Johnson, Rubens’ Chapeau de paille (or is it Rembrandt’s?) and the beautiful little child’s face of Greuze of which I bought a photograph. There are not so many as I expected by Hogarth; only a series called mariage à la mode. The famous Turner collection of pictures and water-colours did not strike me so exceedingly, they are rather confused sometimes. 
Another interesting thing to note is the visit to the library of the British Museum to-day. I am always fond of books, but this innumerable, astonishing heap of them oppressed me and made me sad. What pains and trouble, what anguish perhaps and efforts has it cost many of the authors and here stand their books, how many of them perhaps quite forgotten or scarcely ever asked for. We went over the whole: novel department, newspaper department and so on, till suddenly we came to a group of children’s picture books. It was like an oasis in a desert. I saw in my fancy the little hands turning over the leaves, and the cosy little faces bending over them; what a sunny picture in contrast with all those learned, gloomy books and their so often uninteresting contents. O could only half of the books that exist, be put away, perhaps it were all the better for it.
To-morrow Mary leaves to my great sorrow; I shall miss her kind face and kinder smile; now for trying to get on all alone, without growing sad or melancholy. I am so afraid people here won’t like me, because I am always so silent and unsociable. If they could only see me at home, how astonished they would be! But after all I now see the truth of my brother’s saying, that it would be good for me to go abroad. Among strangers no fuss is made about you, you are not spoiled as at home where everything you do is applauded, but must make a way for yourself to the hearts of your companions. Only it is so very difficult when you are not accustomed to it.–
To-day we saw Mary off; she was very sorry at leaving Miss Gard, for I think they both really love each other. I wish she would love me too a little, but I don’t know how to do. I feel her so immensely my superior and that makes me ill at ease.
Well then, having seen Mary off, Miss Young and I went on a steamer from Blackwall to Blackfriars Bridge over the Thames. The sight of all those wharves reminded me more than ever of Dickens. Dirty little boys, some of them barefooted, played along the shore, waddling knee deep into the water; sulky, not less dirty looking men lounged along and I thought of the man in Our Mutual Friend who fished up all the things, corpses, men that were washed ashore by the river. But I should like to see the Thames with green borders and smiling looking villas and shall then have quite another impression than now, with its dark warehouses and gloomy factories.–
Miss Gard kissed me to-night twice, thrice perhaps and for the first time was very kind to me. I felt so happy that moment, more than I have ever felt before as long as I am here. O how I should like to live with her always and go and teach during the day. How I should profit by her example and really try to become better. O now that I am from home I feel for the first time, how selfish and bad a life I have led, always thinking about myself and growing conceited and vain and wicked. How much have I to change before I am like Mary, kind and thinking always about other people and making them comfortable. Shall I make another new resolution and try! Yes, let me begin to-morrow, the new week with a new plan, not thinking about myself, but of others and be cheerful and gay and thankful for all the innumerable blessings which I have got.
I heard a beautiful sermon by Stopford Brooke to-day, and went to church quite alone with Miss Gard, very nice. I feel so much better now, how can I ever have been so wicked and bad as I have been. O God help me to come back to thee, don’t leave me, do not lead me into temptation but deliver me from Evil. Amen. 
Here I am again in the Museum, in the close atmosphere of all the wisdom and knowledge and I cannot help looking back with regret upon the sunny landscape, the blooming gardens, the sparkling fountains and fresh-balmy air which I enjoyed yesterday at Hampton Court. It was a delightful day and for fear of the impression fading away too soon, I must try to remember as much as possible about it. The castle itself, though very interesting and old, is not handsome and built for the greater part of red-brick. The entrance, however, is splendidly sculptured, and having passed it you come into the Fountain Court and at last into the Court of the clock tower. The Hall of Arms is decorated with pictures and trophies of arms and leads into the Great Hall where the greater part of the pictures are to be found. Then follow the several bedrooms of the different kings, William and Mary, Anne, King George etc. with their dressing-rooms, writing closets and private rooms, some of them commanding a splendid view of the park. Among the numerous pictures was one representing Queen Elizabeth in a fancy dress covered with swallows, another representing Henry VIII with Jane Seymour, their little son Edward VI and at one side Mary, at the other side Elizabeth. Then there is a splendid picture by Tintoretto representing Queen Esther brought before the throne of the king; she has a most lovely fair face. Very interesting were also the portraits of the Court-ladies. Lady Hamilton, Duchess of Cleveland etc. etc. and among them also the beautiful actress Nell Gwynne. 
When we were tired with seeing the castle we descended into the Park, visited the celebrated old vine, the Dutch gardens. And then sat down on a bench near the sparkling fountains, where we were fanned by a balmy fresh air and enjoyed the sunshine and beauty around us. From Hampton Court we then went by tram to Richmond, in order to visit the famous Richmond Hill. We had to traverse first the little town, which looks quite aristocratic with its many private carriages, nice elegant shops and pretty little villas. The way goes up-hill and having asked our way continually, which is a favourite pastime of Anni, we came at last to the Hill. The view from there is lovely. At the foot of the hill flows the Thames under the shade of the green trees; partly covered by these lies the Manor House and the prospect in the distance is very fine. We sat down on the slope of the hill, finished our lunch there and bathed ourselves for a time in the sunshine. Kee was very tired but I did not feel it then; only when we were in the tram which carried us homewards I felt it; dinner was waiting for us and soon after that we were quietly seated in the Drawing room, I near Miss Gard who was very kind to me. When I went upstairs to fetch my work, she was also in her room next to mine. We went down together and on the stairs she suddenly put her arm around me and kissed me, it made me glad for the whole evening so that I even ventured to play on the piano for the first time since I am here. I wish I played better, it would be a nice amusement for them all.
Here I am running on without even having told of my visit to Westminster Abbey or the Houses of Parliament. And yet I enjoyed it so much! Especially the latter building with its statues, its golden ceilings, its pomp and luxury struck me with wonder and delight. Then I saw the Houses of Lords and of Commons, things about which you read always and which I can’t fancy to have really seen. This is the same with Westminster Abbey, how often have I read about the Poet’s Corner, the inscriptions and monuments of all the great men and now I have really seen it, that: O rare Ben Jonson, that statue of Shakespeare, of Addison, those simple graves of Dickens and Macaulay! When I came home I directly read over Addison’s visit to Westminster Abbey with its beautiful: “When I see the tombs of the Great, all envy and desire dies in me.” O for the power of describing and giving back what I felt and saw and see still in my mind’s eye.
Afternoon.
I read just now my diary and wonder at my stupid, silly way of writing. Can’t I do it better than that; perhaps I do not take time enough for it and then I forgot to note down all the curious little incidents which happen among all those boarders. Surely the subjects upon which I have to write are curious and amusing enough. Poor old Miss Brandon with her trembling goodnight, always wanting to see and hear everything which passes around her, with her everlasting stories about people she knew and the old ladies at the boarding house who always quarrelled together but who never could put her “out of temper”. She was worthy to be described by Dickens. And yet how touching when she tells about poor Sister Lucy, the youngest of the three who was always weak and had to be nursed and cared for and Martha, the eldest who, too, died before her and left her quite alone in the world. Only when music is mentioned does she come once more into her element and I never shall forget that look of triumph on her face when one evening she sat down before the piano and played. With what a proud, happy look did she mention yesterday: “To-morrow I am going out for lunch,” so childishly happy! Best of all I like Mr Power, though why I can’t tell as he is always silent and never said anything to me, but he has such a kind yet sarcastic smile on his face sometimes, such an amused look in his eyes and yet such a calm deportment, quite indifferent to anybody. I think he and Dr Schmaltz don’t like each other very much, the latter is not unkind or disagreeable but still he is a downright mof. I don’t like him very much. I wonder how the house will be when so many of them are going away. I shall be left quite alone with Miss Gard almost.
Yesterday night in the twilight we were talking about money and stocks and suddenly she broke out in a bitter complaint. We are always so unfortunate. One morning I awoke and found that I had lost £ and a short time after that Alice lost £ . It must be very hard when once you have had money to lose it and to be obliged to provide for your own living. I should like to know something about their former life; surely they have lived in very good society once.
This morning I got two letters, one from Jo from Bunnik and another from little Mien, a very sad, melancholy letter that last one. I shall write her in answer a very long one and try to do her some good. I am sure she is not in a good healthy condition and something ought to be done for her, else she will be spoiled for her whole life. O when I look back now upon the many days, weeks, even months which I have spoiled and wasted through my own unhappy temper and low spirits! How foolish and silly, let me try never to grow so again; whatever happens, nice or unpleasant things, of course you can’t help feeling the difference, but no more melancholy or vain selfish indulging in grief! Life is too short that we should not try to make most of it.–
To-day when I went from the museum I took a walk to Waterloo-Bridge, one of the manyo bridges I have seen hitherto, with a fine view on St Paul’s to the left and the Houses of Parliament to the right, their golden spires sparkled in the sunlight and contrasted finely with the kind of haze or mist which is here always in the air. Well, then I descended to the Thames embankment, walked up to Cleopatra’s needle and the Victoria embankment and ran home in a hurry for it was near half past six. In the Hall I found a letter for me from M. Stumpff and running upstairs, letter in hand, there I found in my room – a parcel from home. O wasn’t it nice! I could have danced for joy; there was my mother’s portrait, all my own pretty things and sweets and biscuits; I feel very childish but it is so nice. I go to bed with a thankful heart, how good they all are to me!
Yesterday in the afternoon we went to Hampstead Heath and spent a delightful time on the green grass between the mossy hills. It reminded me a little of Bloemendaal. To-day I went with Miss Young to the Botanic Gardens and from there to the National Gallery, where I enjoyed once more the delightful pictures, the bell ringing for tea interrupts me so I will finish to-night on going to bed.
Yesterday, Sunday, was a curious day for me. In the morning I felt very unhappy and cross for two reasons. Mr Landis had asked Anni and Kitty to go with him to Windsor and I thought he would never ask me which made me rather miserable. Then they went together to St Paul’s Church also without asking me to go with them. Added to this that the weather looked gloomy and dark, all these things together were enough to bring me in a bad temper. Miss Gard on going to church took pity on me and took me with her, so from that moment I was a changed being. The service, the singing with her out of one book, the sermon by Stopford Brooke en[thus[?]ingp us to do our work and not shirk our duty, made me all right again. Then Miss Gard went out to dinner and we had a very quiet afternoon, with a little music, a little letter writing and a little talk. I had put on my light cream dress and I am almost ashamed to say so, but the idea of looking rather nice always puts me more at my ease. In the evening we danced a little, then Mr Landis asked me to join them to Windsor and I was quite happy again.
But the day was not so nice as I had expected. Mr Landis, kind though he is and trying his utmost to amuse us, is not a nice person to go out with, because he is too nervous and not sure enough about the trams and the way. Then his terrible confusion of the languages makes a conversation with him almost impossible to me, or rather let me say that I felt dreadfully shy and uncomfortable and was the most tedious, unamusing companion whatever. But I have seen Windsor and I don’t think I shall easily forget the splendid views from the Long Walk on the turrets of the castle. It looks from the outside like a fortress, with its grey walls and battlements to which the scarlet coats of the soldiers form a charming contrast. As it was Bank Holiday to-day the park was crowded; everywhere on the grass were little groups enjoying their lunch or lovers leaning against a tree and playing with each other’s hands or so. Then when suddenly a shower overtook us all, this love making was continued under an umbrella, for which they were not sorry perhaps, as it hid them from all obtrusive glances. And fancy, directly when we approached the castle or rather St George’s Chapel, there I saw Cole, at last I fancied I saw him, only he was a little changed. Suddenly all the remembrance of the happy hours spent in his church rushed upon me and I felt again that strange happy feeling which I also had at church yesterday.
To-morrow Anni and Kitty are going. Am I sorry or not? I don’t know, upon the whole I think I am, for I shall feel so lonely without anybody to fall back upon for a little chat or some advice or help. Oh what shall I do? for I’m sure I shall feel uncomfortable and shy among all the gentlemen or when I am alone with Miss Gard. I shall scarcely open my mouth perhaps; why cannot I make myself amusing and interesting to the people? At home I always can and am liked and applauded by almost every one for my wit and jokes and easy talk. But that’s just the thing which I want. I was too conceited and proud of myself (though it is hard to write it down) and it was quite necessary for me to learn a lesson of humility.–
I am so sorry I have not kept my diary better; so many interesting things have I let go by without noting them. In the future I shall write every night before going to bed, that is the best thing and I can then think over the whole day.
I must keep to my promise and write for a moment, though I am very tired. Anni and Kitty are gone. I saw them off with Dr Schmaltz and v. Buren, and when we came home we had a strange, yet not unpleasant evening. Poor Miss Gard had gone to bed with a very bad headache, Miss Brandon was in her room, too, and then there was the new boarder, an engineer from Venezuela, who speaks a little French and English and Spanish. He looked very shy at first, so that conquered mine and I began to talk to him. The others joined in and we had a nice chat about Paris and foreign countries etc.
I will try to make myself as agreeable and amusing as I can; and don’t let me forget to go and see Miss Brandon if she is still in her room to-morrow.
I spent a very agreeable afternoon in South Kensington Museum with Dr Schmaltz. One of the most agreeable I have had here. I should like to know what it is that makes me always so much better at ease when I am alone with a person than when I am in a large company. I felt not at all uncomfortable now and am sure I was not so dull and unamusing. I saw a great many most interesting pictures; scenes from Shakespeare’s plays, portraits of Byron, Johnson, Steele, scenes from the Vicar of Wakefield, from Tristam Shandy, from the Good-natured man by Goldsmith etc. Then I saw the manuscripts of Dickens’ novels, a portrait of Dickens, one of Carlyle (the well-known one), a bust of Marie Antoinette, and portraits of Pompadour and Du Barry. Beautiful Sèvre porcelain is numerous, then there are some beautiful cases of statues, of Michel Angelo’s David and his slaves and several others, a splendid iron gate with the rose motive in the middle. I thought it was by Quentin Massys but it was by an English artist. After that we went to the Museum of Natural History, built in of yellow brick and adorned with curious little fishes and flowers. I heard too little of these sciences, botany and zoology to have profited much by it; still I am glad I saw it.
The evening was very uncomfortable and not at all nice. Why cannot I be a little more talkative and amusing?
I spent a quiet day at the Museum reading Moore’s Lalla Rookh and Irish melodies. I brought Miss Gard some flowers for which she gave me a nice kiss; but then she went out to the Crystal Palace so I have not seen her since. Miss Alice showed me to-night in her room some photographs and told me about her brother, who was the favourite of them all and who loved her especially, and came home from America only to die in their arms. She had tears in her eyes, poor Miss Alice! I felt quite cold thinking about something like that happening to me. My dear brothers! God grant them a long, happy, prosperous life. I feel so proud of them. To-morrow is the famous day for Epping Forest – I wish it were past already!
Well the day is past and moreq than I expected. The weather was lovely, the scenery splendid and the girls very kind. Maud, Mary and Bettel! Poor Maud, with her pale little face and lame foot, how sad! And Mary with her high buoyant spirit, how energetic and full of courage she seems. They are an interesting group with those nice boys! They have asked me to take tea with them one night. I should like to see their home.
What a quiet Sunday afternoon! For the first time I feel it that the girls are away and that I am rather lonely. But Mr Blanco has given me many nice French books to read by Legouvé and others, so I have enough to do. That odious Dutchman Landsman I cannot bear; yet it is unkind of me, for of course he wants some help and kindness, as I wanted it too and want it still. What shall I say to Miss Gard to-night, I want to become a little more intimate with her. Dr Schmaltz is going away but another German comes in his stead so we shan’t be lonely.
I have been yesterday with Miss Salmon to Covent Garden to hear a concert. It was very nice to hear some music at last and it was a well-known programme. Part of Beethoven’s symphony, Meyerbeer’s Prophète etc., then a lady sang the famous aria from Rossini’s Barbier de Sevilla and some more English and Scotch songs: Charlie is my darling, Three Sisters etc.
I have worked hard today, or rather I have been enjoying Byron’s Childe Harold ever so much. O how fine is Keats’ saying “A thing of beauty is a joy for ever”, for the more you read them the more you learn to feel and understand the beauty. There was a time when I thought Byron too melancholy and morbid and thought he would do me harm, but now I only feel pity and love for him. How I followed him in his walks to Shelley’s cottage, in their delightful rowing on the lakes and walks in the snow-lit nights and long conversations about poetry and religion! 
Ye stars which are the poetry of heaven! 
I saw the Tower to-day with the Jewels and Armouries, then Guildhall, library, reading room, banquet hall with Gog and Magog and the room where the Lord Mayor and the Aldermen assemble. From there I went to St Paul’s, climbed up to the Whispering Gallery which did not strike me very much and then to the Stone Gallery, where I enjoyed the splendid view of London, or rather it oppressed me a little, the sight of those innumerable streets and houses.
I was much disappointed this morning that Miss Gard could not go with me to church. I went with Miss Alice to hear Spurgeon, suffered an immense heat and did not hear him very well. Can that man with his coarse tone be the teacher of Cole? Then I went to Anne at Mrs Salmon, but found only Maud and the boys at home, so it was a very quiet day. Their rooms are very neat and nicely furnished; they seem to have an excellent taste. Their bookcases are delightful, the hearth and the little chairs reminded me again of Little Women. I would almost fancy Jo lying on the rug. The picture of their Papa is that of a very handsome, clever man, they seem to be of a good family.
Poor, lame Maud, what a sad life she must have, always reading and lying on the sofa.
To-day I had to take leave of Shelley for some time at least, for I have spent nearly a week in reading all his delightful letters and biographies. Especially that by Hogg pleased me very much, for where all the others treat him chiefly as a poet or as a half God whose throne is half hidden in the clouds, Hogg treats him as an ordinary human being, tells us of his daily habits, represents him to us basking himself in the heat of the fire lying on the rug, his long sleeps in the evening, his abstractions and oddness, his great sensitiveness to rude or inharmonious sounds, his thundering knocks on the door, all these bring before us a living Shelley, noble and generous, elevated in his ideas but yet so thoroughly human. And those first years of married life, how does it satisfy us to know that poor Harriet, whose life ended so tragically, yet “had her day” too, as all human beings have, and bathed herself for one short time in the full sunlight of happiness. They were not more than children, but o what happy children, as they leaned together over the balcony of their house in Edinburgh looking for persons who seemed likely for Shelley’s address to the Irish people, which he threw down at them then; how Harriet laughed when Bysshe hid one in the hood of a lady’s cloak. At least they were happy then. 
Now that I heard that Shelley read sixteen hours a day I know that my six hours can’t hurt me. These English ladies to-day at lunch seemed quite astonished at it. It is not so very long after all, I could wish still more if I only heard that I should pass. I want to have done with always preparing for action only; I want to begin to set to work in earnest. My evenings I shall always spend in reading and studying, I’m much too fond of it! My dear old books, they are, as Macaulay says, the truly old friends that never put on new faces! But for all that I must not forget my real old friend, very dear Anne, how glad we shall be to see each other again!
After having passed from Shelley, I began to-day Swinburne and read his tragedy Chasteland, some parts were very nice but the whole did not make much impression on me, it is too passionate and sensual; from Rossetti’s criticism on his Poems and Ballads I saw that Swinburne is an Atheist and pagan in his heart, I don’t feel much sympathy for him, though I know very little about him as yet, but he seems to me cold. To-morrow I shall read some of his minor poems.
Yesterday – v. Buren went back to Holland, so I am now the only Dutch one in the house and at the Museum. I am now quite alone “really and truly” and must make the best of it for these three weeks. It will now be all work and not much play, but that is no more than fair, I have had pleasure enough here. It is very quiet in the house now, only Mr Landis and Mrs Gully are my companions and the latter might as well not be there. Mr Landis, however, is very kind to me and played last night at draughts till ten o’clock. Miss Gard had some friends staying with her and I felt more uncomfortable than ever, and scarcely opened my mouth at lunch. However Miss Gard saw they liked me so much! It is more than I expected.–––––
I went to-day quite by myself to Dulwich to see the picture Gallery. It was so strange going about alone to a place where I knew nothing about the way, but still I found it quite well and enjoyed the pictures immensely. The Gallery is but small, rooms upon the whole but contains several fine Dutch pictures, landscapes of Hobbema and Ruysdael, interiors by Teniers and Ostade etc. What struck me most were the Spanish peasant boys by Murillo, his Madonna del Rosario, some splendid portraits by v. Dyck, Rembrandt’s “Girl at a window” and the portrait of Mrs Sheridan and her sister painted by Gainsborough. A splendid portrait of Mrs Siddons by Sir Joshua Reynolds represents her as the tragic muse. When I came out of the Gallery I had almost half an hour’s walk to the station; the weather was most lovely and the air fresh and haling,r which is quite a treat coming out of the close atmosphere of London, so I enjoyed it immensely. But the pleasant impression was quite effaced by those horrid trains; it always gives me a headache. I should not like to live always in such a continual hurry and bustle. I am writing now in the drawing-room which is now quiet and almost deserted in the evening. Only Miss Gard and Miss Brandon are there, the former is very kind to me to-night. I love her so much!
I went to church this morning with Miss Gard, to a beautiful little church in Gordon Square; the sun shone through the stained windows quite beautifully, it was cool and quiet and the singing always does me good; I really think if I stayed long enough here I should grow quite religious again.
O my love, my love why did you take from me my heart and my faith! 
Well the rest of the Sunday was very quiet; in the evening I had a nice little chat with Miss Gard on the leads, it was a beautiful starlit night.
To-day I went to the fisheries, but did not enjoy it so very much, I felt so stupid, never said a word; the cousin who went with Miss Gard was very nice, the whole family seems to be so. But the effect of the fisheries seems to be – headache. Everybody has it, Miss Gard is gone to bed and so shall I. But really I must work hard to-morrow, I am growing so lazy, I never do anything in the evening. It is a shame!
The day was not very nice. At the museum I read very little and that little confused, some things by Browning, by Godwin, by Bulwer not regular. Then I began Hawthorne’s Transformation and read in it some beautiful descriptions of the gardens in Villa Borghese, Hilda and her Dove Cot etc.
The evening was very nice. I had had a letter from Marie Westendorp in the morning, so I gave it to Miss Gard to read and looked over her shoulder in the letter; she was so nice and kind I loved her twice. Miss Alice and Mr Landis were out together to the Fisheries, so I had her quite to myself. On Saturday some new people are coming!
I fled from the noise of the drawing-room to the unoccupied silent dining room, and am sitting quite at my ease with all my books around me. I think after all I prefer the company of my books to that of people, or rather the one makes me unfit for the other.– The French party arrived to-day, the boy seems amusing and funny but he is such a fidget; I think boys are a great nuisance. The ladies are shouty like all French ladies, well dressed and elegant, but there is something so cold and measly in their faces. No I prefer by far the English people. Look at that cousin of Miss Gard’s, she is a real woman, kind and motherly; not at all elegant it is true, and no handsome face but she is so kind. You see directly that she has a good heart and would help you if you were in trouble.
I read to-day Rossetti’s poems. Perhaps it is a very superficial judgement which I pronounce, but I think the poets of our days, Swinburne, Rossetti and even Browning are so shadowy and unreal. They use a number of fine well sounding words, but you must guess at the meaning behind, and sometimes do not find a meaning at all. They want to be something particular, different from other people, Italian perhaps? for are they not called the Pre-Raphaelite school, but I don’t understand it very well.
No, than the poems of Elizabeth Barrett Browning pleased me better. There is something so attractive in the story of her life too. That poor young girl always confined to her sick-room with her books and little lap-dog for only amusement, transformed in the happy, proud wife of England’s great poet! How I should like to know something about their courtship, how they learned to know each other? and whether it really was such an ideal bond between them. Judging from her Sonnets from the Portuguese she must have been a happy woman indeed! beloved by such a man and being capable of pouring out her iron love in such melodious songs! Thrice happy woman.
There is something noble and elevated in all she writes; no foolish eccentricities, no unnecessary display of learning (and yet she was so clever) but “a perfect woman, nobly planned”, that’s the impression she makes upon me. “The Rhyme of the Duchess May”, pleased me very much!
Swinburne’s Atalanta in Calydon cannot be sufficiently appreciated by me because I do not know Greek and therefore cannot judge about its classical value. Some of the choruses are very beautiful.
I had a very long conversation with Mr de Jong to-day. Poor fellow, if anybody deserves to pass his exam it is he, for he works thrice as much as I do. He has given me his compositions to read and they are better, much better than I expected; still there is something I should almost say narrow-minded about them or bookish, but at all events they are much better than mine, and I must try hard and make some which are nearer the mark than those I wrote formerly. O I am sure I never shall pass! If only Dries gets me a place at Paris I shall be quite happy. 
How stupid Miss Gard will think me to-day, I hardly spoke to her and yet I love her so much!– Now for to-night I have written enough, Mr Landis begins to play, the music seems to loosen this tight band round my head and falls softly and melodiously on my ears – “I pant for the music which is divine, my soul in its thirst is a thirsting flower.” 
My last Sunday but one! Well I really must write faithfully this one week, for it will soon be over and then I cannot write anymore. This morning I have been to church in Westminster Abbey with Miss Py and her cousin. I liked it very much; I never felt how nice it is to ––
Well I can’t finish my sentence of Sunday so I must only write of to-day. Dr Schmaltz came back from Scotland. It was so nice to see him again. He brought beautiful photographs of Loch Katrine and Loch Lomond and the Highlands; it was a very pleasant afternoon. In the morning I had shown those French ladies all over the British Museum, so I did not work very much. I must make up for it to-morrow. But why do I write all these commonplace things, I might call this indeed a Commonplace Book for it is quite full of them, and of the real state of my mind and feelings I never write. For instance this morning when I read in Hawthorne that splendid chapter on Painted windows. “Christian faith is a grand cathedral with divinely pictured windows. Standing without you see no glory nor can possibly imagine any, standing within every ray of light reveals a harmony of unspeakable splendour”. 
Yesterday night I went with Mr de Jong to the Princess’s Theatre to see Silver King by Wilson Barrett. It is such a funny piece, real English beginning with a murder, then the police detectives, a railway station, all as commonplace as possible. And the public is childishly made indignants at the villains and as childishly glad of every good charitable man or act. In the former case they hiss, in the latter they applaud as loudly as possible, till the voice cries out: Order, Order and all becomes silent again. We were in the pit, not very fashionable seats, untamelyt but very well fit to see and observe the people. You can clearly see that it is the hard working, drudging class of people who all day long busy themselves in the crowded streets, who come for relaxation there in the evening. They bring generally some refreshments with them and alas I saw too the flash of brandy what hitherto has so mercifully been hidden from my sight.
This morning when I came down for breakfast, I found Miss Gard all alone at her breakfast. So I kissed her at once and that made me happy for the whole day. Then I went with her to do all her shopping; what an active, brisk little woman she is. To see her skip in and out the shops with her pretty blue and white spotted dress does your heart good to see; she gave me a nice, juicy pear, very kind of her. I had bis a letter from André thi morning, rather a melancholy one.
Well, who had ever dreamed that I should ride on a tricycle! Yesterday afternoon when I called on Mrs Salmon I performed that heroic feat without tumbling off luckily. It is awfully jolly as Mary says, only poor girl, she has thrown over and hurt herself rather badly. So then we went home and had tea in Mr Salmon’s room, where there was a cosy little fire all exactly as if taken from one of the English novels isn’t it. Ann and Mary are exactly Jo and Laurie, exactly. 
The evening was very nice too. I worked a new little mat and shall give it to Miss Py when it is finished. This morning when I came down for breakfast Miss Gard gave me such a nice brooch which she has worn herself, so it is the dearest keepsake she could give me. I love her so much and shall be so sorry to go away from her! Only when I think of being back again in Holland my heart gives a great jump, oh I long to see all the dear faces once more!
I feel very happy and calm to-night. I sat at tea quite close to Miss Gard and she talked to me all the time, told me about her aunt and her lovely house and how they, when they were children, used to go and see her dressed for her balls in her cold and stately beauty. Dear Miss Gard, if anybody deserves to be rich and should use it well and nobly it were she.
But I forgot quite to write about the nice walk which I had yesterday with her. We intended to see the Soane museum but it was shut for the winter so we only walked about a little round Lincoln Inn’s Field and saw the new Law Courts, a very interesting place. We finished our walk with some shopping.
Miss Py left this morning. How strange it must be for Miss Gard always to have people going and others coming again!
My last evening – in the drawing room. I cannot understand that I shall go away tomorrow and never see Miss Gard’s kind face and the reading room and my own little room – I am just growing accustomed now to everything – but this sounds as if I were not glad to go home again and yet I am glad – very glad, only I do not understand it quite yet.
This morning I went with Miss Gard to the Foundling’s church at the earnest recommendation of Miss Brandon, but the sight of all these poor little children made me sad, it was so touching to see some of these poor pale little faces and to think that never they shall know a mother’s fond care and love, and miss that paradise which we all had in our youth – a happy home. On walking home we talked about religion and prayers, and then Miss Gard showed me a beautiful little poem Prayer of Montgomery. So I went again to church this evening with Miss Alice and tried O so hard to find my way to God, to let my prayers penetrate to him & reach his ears. All the time that I am writing these French people are chattering and giggling, o how much better I like the English. They are so much more like our Dutch character.
And now what more shall I write. My holidays, my nice stay here is over and I go back no worse, but I hope a little, little better than I went. I have learned that kindness and benevolence must find their way to everybody’s heart, but above all I have seen the example of a noble woman.
I am packing my box, quite a serious affair for me who am so unaccustomed to such things. Farewell London with thy smoke and dust, thy poverty and misery, itu makes me sad at heart to think of all that is suffered between thy halls, but still I shall always keep a pleasant memory of thee. Farewell all kind hearts who have shown me kindness, I shall never forget thee.– 
I have been at home for more than a week and have now for the first time read over my diary written in London! Oh how sorry I am that I did not keep it better and wrote more! And that I did not profit more from everything! Well it can’t be helped. Experience is the best teacher and whenever I go again, I shall do better.
I am waiting and waiting for a letter from Miss Gard. But I wrote her such a foolish, exaggerated one. Perhaps she won’t answer it. Dear, dear Miss Gard! I see her continually before me; in the morning sitting before the breakfast table in her nice blue dress, looking so bright and fresh that I could not help kissing her; then in the evening in her long-tailed gown with her fan and nice little slippers; I wish I could for a moment slip into the cosy chair and draw it quite close to her and link my arm in hers as I did that last Sunday night. Oh those calm, nice Sundays, those church goings together, how I shall miss them! And that when we went to bed, how I used to wait and wait, first in the drawing room and then in my bedroom, till I heard her coming up stairs and then put my head outside the door to kiss her. Silly girl as I am. The last days were the nicest; I felt for the first time comfortable and free then; I gave her a Shelley in a very simple binding, for she does not like much gold, and then she asked me to write her name in it and she kissed me. Before dinner I was sitting in the drawing room for the last time when down she came dressed in her old black dress with the yellow buttercups at her throat. She sat down in her favourite little chair, I knelt down beside her, and we had a nice little chat. She told me she should go with me to the station to see me off, and so she did. In the cab we took a first farewell and then when I was in the carriage already she kissed me for the last time and said “God bless you” and that is the last I heard and saw of her.––
I came home after a very good, easy passage, but since that time I am very dissatisfied with myself. I have been a little cross, a little lazy, unkind and haughty. Altogether very bad and notwithstanding everyone in the house has been so kind and loving to me! It must change, and I must set to work for the examination also! To-day I had my first lesson from Mr v. Kampen; that was the beginning.
For the first time I am going to work again in the old little room, what a difference with the reading-room, I cannot imagine that I have ever been there! Still no letter from Miss Gard; has she forgotten me already or was she angry at my silly letter. O I do hope she will write.
Yesterday morning I went alone to the English Church and though there is no choir and the singing is not very nice, still I like to go there; it reminds me of my churchgoings with Miss Gard. How many delightful mornings have I had; first Stopford Brooke, whose beautiful melodious voice I only learned to appreciate after he had gone and I could compare it in my thoughts with those of the other clergymen I heard. Then the beautiful singing in St Anne’s Church, in Westminster Abbey, but above all the nice little church in Gordon Square where we went so often in the evening.
Well it was a nice day yesterday at home; one thing is certain, that there is endless more variety and that the time passes very quickly. Friday night we had the beautiful music of Papa’s quartet, and that same evening Albert came to bring me beautiful flowers. How we did laugh! Yesterday I paid some calls with Mien; the pleasantest was at Mrs Doorman’s, who was very kind as usual. I wonder what it is that I always feel so much at home there. To-night I must begin to practisev for the grand festivities of the th. I wish it were well over & past; it is too bad, and I don’t like it a bit. But now I must really stop writing and begin to work. I wonder whether I shall hear again from Mrs Fisher at Wight. 
To-day Kitty v.d. Wissel called on me and we had a nice long talk about London of course. She showed me the letter which Miss Gard has written to her; a very kind, nice letter. I wish I had one too! It makes me feel so unsettled, I can’t set to work in earnest; there I have been the whole day trying to write my composition and it is not yet finished. First I tried George Eliot, now I think I shall take Macbeth, for it must be finished to-night. I shall go and practise on the piano every day, yesterday I played for the first time a trio with papa and Henri even liked it immensely; if I had practised more I should now be more advanced that’s certain. 
How different is it to write my diary now. When I was in London I had always something to tell what I had seen or done, but now I must write only what I felt during the day or what I read, for particular things do not happen every day. I am glad to say that I feel again interested in my work; when I wrote that composition on Macbeth I felt quite happy and I think it was a good one, at least Mr v. Kampen said so. I had a very pleasant hour with him yesterday; and oh when I was on my way to his house I met Anni Kuiper, who is just returned from Ellecom. The first impression was: “how tall she is.” I would scarcely reach her shoulder; I wonder whether I shall learn to know her better. I don’t feel very much attracted towards her.
Mien and I had our photographs taken to-day, how vain of us isn’t it? Well of one thing I am sure, that in London I felt better, less worldly-minded, simpler and humbler than here. But I must try to be the same everywhere. I just reread an old letter of André’s; dear, kind brother, I love him so much, God bless him and grant him a successful happy life; what is he going to do? Stay in Paris, go elsewhere or come back to Amsterdam? What would be the best for him? Such things are so difficult to decide, we mortals are so short-sighted.
I despatched a second letter to Miss Gard. Will she never answer me!
The letter has come to-day, hurrah; at last, at last she has answered me and with such a kind, nice letter; she writes to me “my dearest child”; I love her so much, oh if I just could peep for a moment in the drawing room and draw my chair quite close to her, shall I ever see her again? Will she write to me on my birthday? As soon as the photographs are come I will send her one; that will be a good occasion for writing again and then she will send hers too.
I worked nothing to-day, for my dress for the dinner party was made, but now from next Monday I’ll really begin to work very hard. I fetched from the library yesterday Macaulay’s Essays and am going to make a comparison now between him and Carlyle. What a difference between our library and the Reading Room of the Museum!
To-morrow morning I will go again to the English church, it reminds me most of London, and I feel so calm and happy there.
I went to church yesterday and we sang that nice hymn “Angels of Jesus, Angels of Light” and also that one The roseate hues of early dawn. Well my churchgoing is the only thing which reminds me of the London Sunday. The rest of the day was all pleasure & laughter. In the afternoon I took a walk with Anne along the Amstel where it was delightfully fresh and nice. We talked about Adolphine and all kinds of things and were as merry as a lark. Then we crossed the river in a little boat to the other side and walked back. In the evening Anni and Jo came, we did nothing but laugh. To-morrow I am going to dine with Anne and stay with her for the night, how nice it will be!
My birthday is past already and I have entered upon my year! What will it bring me; is fortune going to smile upon me or are there sad things in store for me. Perhaps it will all depend upon myself, may God help me and teach me to act worthily and rightly. Well I began the year very badly indeed, in quarrelling with Anne, and all about a game of chess, isn’t it silly? I am so sorry for the day before, all was so pleasant when I stayed with her for the night. We spent such a nice evening together looking over nice pictures (Illustrations of the Iliad and Odyssey by Flaxman), playing at chess etc. Otherwise my birthday passed very happily; Anni Kuiper came to congratulate me, Lena, Marie, Anne of course but above all I received two delightful letters, one from Paris with a nice book by Ludovic Halévy from André, and one from Miss Gard with a beautiful birthday card with forget-me-nots. Sunday afternoon I shall go and answer them all, these two will be quite a treat to answer them. I also had a very nice letter from Anne v.d. Kop. 
Sunday again and a very busy one. This morning I did not go to church but read a little in Copperfield; it is certainly the best of Dickens and perhaps of all the books I have read. Then in the afternoon we had to pay calls, first the Silver wedding, then to the newly married couple, where everything was nice and comfortable, and a few others. So now in the evening it is the first little moment I have to write and I shall try to answer Miss Gard’s letter.
Revisedw with Mary to-day; she stayed with me for lunch. She is very kind and good natured, only I always feel with people who are richer or higher in life a little shy. But it is foolish, for she is not more than I am, only I must try to be more refined in manners, tone and everything – and in kindness, then I shall be her equal. We talked much about Miss Gard still; I did not finish my letter to her, for I have been working very hard to-day. Mary knows many more dates and facts than I.
I have been reading David Copperfield to-night; oh the immense pleasure which the reading of English books in general, but this one in particular gives me after I have been in London. I see the flowerpot and the little table with the marble top of Traddles standing at the broker’s shop in Tottenham Court Road, and the house of the Micawbers in Camden Town! How well I know the dreary aspect of those small houses all built exactly alike, like that of Mrs Salmon!
I am very tired to-night from having been running about all day to apply for the place of English teacher at the new schools, the number of persons I have spoken to is quite wonderful. To-morrow I must work hard again, very hard!
My thoughts are continually with Copperfield and Agnes. Oh to have known her, to have felt her angelic influence, her serene and calm spirit. I always think Mrs Doorman a little like her; that pure, high forehead, those beautiful tender eyes. Agnes must have had them too. Dora, the child wife is a little stupid, sometimes I can’t bear her with her crying and sobbing and “oh take me to Julia Mills please!” but still the picture of her sitting quite silent near David when he is writing, she keeping the pens for him, which little service makes her feel attached to his work and with her tender eyes fondly attached on the face of her husband, is touching and sweet!
I have been reading over my diary of two years ago! It seems to me such a long, long time since I wrote that, what a child I was then! What a distance there lies between me and that time! I see now that I am grown older and wiser – but sadder, my heart seems so heavy within me sometimes. No prospect of happiness lies before me, only work and duty. Oh let me try daily more and more to perform my work cheerfully and well, to do my duty towards all those around me, to make myself better and nobler!
Yesterday night we spent the evening with Lida and Johan. Their new little house is delightful and so comfortable! but still I don’t think they can be very happy; at least I could not be with such a husband as that. And in Lida there is poetry, with what enthusiasm did she speak about David Copperfield, she knew it almost by heart.
But the examination warns me to set to work. Shall I succeed or not?
I feel rather tired and stupid to-day after the dinner party of yesterday. It was a splendid feast but still I did not enjoy it so very much. What’s the use of talking to all those strange people whom probably I never in all my life shall see again? And then there is no golden mean between flirting or being rather silent and as I am in a mood of trying to be good, I did not do the first, so I am afraid I was rather dull. Well it is past again and now for setting to work in earnest.
I must just add that I went to the English church yesterday morning; it did me so much good, and in the afternoon we took a splendid walk. The weather was perfectly, lovely, so fresh and clear, the golden and brown hues of the leaves must have done a painter’s eyes good to see and I enjoyed it immensely.
Is it very silly to write a diary? I cannot help thinking of Blanche in Pendennis writing “Mes Larmes” or Julia Mills in Copperfield with her numerous books out of which she tried to console poor David. It is just the thing for a very sentimental young lady to do. But I try not to be sentimental and still I think it is better to continue, for at least something remains now of all the days that glide by so quickly and silently; now and then I take one moment to think and to reflect and though I know perfectly well that I have not at all the right manner of writing, I hope it will improve by and by.
I have been enjoying the Newcomes this morning. It is one of the books which leaves you much better than before you read it. There is something so large-minded noble in the touching description of generous old Colonel Newcome, that all mean & sordid actions in thoughts been incompatible with it. And that description of dear little Miss Honeyman’s boarding house at Brighton, how it reminded me of Miss Gard!
From out my window, whenever I lift my eyes from the copy book before me, I gaze on the beautiful blue sky. White sunny clouds, pure and lovely are sailing through it, sometimes they open and afford a prospect wide and blue as the sea. And it strikes me how ungrateful we men are to all the beauties of nature around us! How insensible to them! There they are near us, quite near and how few are the people who observe them. I begin to understand Wordsworth better now.
Is it the old story beginning over and over again? I thought I never should feel so bad again and miserable and unhappy and here I am! The day has been most disagreeable and here I am sitting in the evening with aching head and aching eyes, tired with reading but above all with a miserable dissatisfied feeling within me. What shall I do, oh what shall I do!
And then when I think of Mary’s smiling, happy, rosy face when she came to see me this morning I wonder how it is that she always feels so cheerful and contented, yet she has to work as hard, perhaps harder than I. Is it only the examination which troubles me so? I think it is; if only once I have some work to do to which I can direct all my thoughts and strength it will be well.
I read this morning the unhappy, pathetic life of Charlotte Brontë, how she must have suffered and so bravely and nobly! I see that chill, dreary, comfortless parsonage of Haworth where she spent so many long years in monotony and suffering. Nobody ought to complain about himself who has read this sad story. But who knows how many have suffered like her, only they could not write Jane Eyre or Villette and so the world did not heed them and they died as they had lived – unknown!
My heart is so full, that I must write down something, but now that I have taken the pen in hand I do not know where to begin. What feeling is uppermost? Let me reflect a little. I think it is a deep, deep consciousness of the great blessing which is conferred upon me in this intercourse with the greatest & noblest of English men and women. How it cheers and sustains your feelings, how it strengthens hope and ardour to read of all they have worked and thought and suffered. It is the realisation of my childish dreams; I always longed to learn and to penetrate a little deeper than usual into other people’s thoughts and ideas and I have penetrated to the very sources. Have I not caught a glimpse of Shelley’s innermost self, of Byron’s weak o proud yet tender and sensitive heart, have I not walked with Wordsworth and his sister Dorothy over the fresh hills and the beautiful lakes of their country, have I not enjoyed the cosy little suppers of Charles Lamb and his poor sister Mary, but above all did I not hear Carlyle’s earnest, solemn words: “Doubt of any sort cannot be removed except by Action. Let him who gropes painfully in darkness or uncertain light, and prays vehemently that the dawn may ripen into day, lay this other precept also well to heart: Do the Duty which lies nearest thee, which thou knowest to be a Duty. The second duty will already have become clearer.” And ought I not to be the better for all this, and ought I not to wish cheerfully and continually for this exam which certainly is the first Duty? No the first, the very first is to be kind to everyone, and not sharp or disagreeable as I am so often. Much may be done by everyone, there’s much for all to do.
This morning I went to church to hear Anni’s papa, for she had told me so much about him that I wanted to know whether he really was what she thought him. And what was the impression he made? A very good one indeed; I think he must be a simple, earnest, quiet, loving and deeply religious man; the type of kind, a littlex old-fashioned clergyman of the novels. What a blessing it must be, to have such a father, how easy to be good, with such a father to teach you! That sounds very ungrateful in me, as if my dear, kind father was not good to us, but I mean he never gives us such spiritual help, I should like to know what kind of a family the Kuipers are, it must be very nice, I think; I always make novels about everything but it really seems like a book.
Well, there is the new week before me, let me begin with new hope; new courage, new ardour. “The peace of the Lord, which passeth all understanding”, might it become my share.
I went with Mary to the library to-day where I read a beautiful sketch by Washington Irving about Westminster Abbey. How strange that such gifted men can express exactly what we others can only feel. For I too was in the Abbey, and impressed by its beauty and seriousness, and I stood near the tomb of Henry VII and of Elizabeth, but what I thought whilst I stood there? I am sure I don’t know, but when I read what he says about it, it suddenly became quite clear to me. And so he too had that delightful sensation when the organ began to play and filled the roomy vaults with its echoes; Mary showed me the letter which she had received from Miss Gard, such a nice, long one.
If I possessed a talent for writing, what beautiful sketches, witty anecdotes or spirited remarks might I not write about everything I read in the day-time. But I have not even time for it; it is already o’clock and I must go to bed. As I am no Charlotte Brontë or so many others, who could write or study in the night. I stupid mortal am too sleepy or I should be utterly unfit for anything next day. I am longing to begin Charlotte Brontë’s Life by Mrs Gaskell; the glimpses I caught of it are most beautiful.
I spent a nice day with Mary at the Library; in the morning we are generally quite alone there, seated near the fire, the book cases close at hand, quite delightful, what will be the result?
I revisedy to day with Mary; how nice and kind she is, she quite softens me down. I have no time, worked very hard all day.
Winter is drawing nearer and nearer; how it saddens me to see all the leaves torn from their branches by the unrelenting wind, blown here and there, and all trodden by our feet. It is true we get next spring new fresh green leaves but the poor old yellow ones, they never come back. Is it not an emblem of our life?
I tried to-day to write about George Eliot but she is too much for me. I think I should be able to write about Charlotte Brontë because she was a girl, and often lonely and unhappy, but such a superior woman. What can a poor stupid thing as I am write about her?
To-night I am going to Anne, I long for a nice little chat with her though I am afraid I ought to have stayed at home to work.
I lunched to-day at Mr De Clercq’s. A most comfortable, elegant, refined, surrounding; how nice for Mary to live there always! 
Nearly a week that I have not written. It is true no great events happened, the days pass all alike, reading and writing either at the museum or at home, but is not the acquaintance made with a new author and his works of more importance, of more influence upon our thoughts and character, than that of some ordinary commonplace person? But I always fail in writing down my thoughts. Aurora Leigh at first made me exquisitely happy, so many doubts and fears which struggle so often in my own heart were there resolved or explained in the most perfect way, I have learned that Art, that even the writing of a book cannot make up to a woman for the loss of an own fireside, of a husband and children, that “Art is much but love more.” Alas my own heart has taught me that long ago; I try to live only for my books and my study, make teaching my highest ideal and aim in life but that cannot take away the feeling of loneliness, the craving after love which we poor women possess. Oh if there were only one person in the world whom I might love passionately and fondly! A friend, a brother, a sister, it would not matter what! but people are so cool and slow in their love. What good does it do me to have one little bit of another’s heart, I want to have the whole! André is the only one whom I want, oh so much, so much! He is my superior, he understands my feelings, experiences the same, he would not think me sentimental or exaggerated, if I told him my thoughts, whilst the others!– There is papa, I know he loves me, if tomorrow he could do anything for me to help me, he would, I am sure, but why does he never speak to me kindly, why does he never take me to his heart and makes me feel that he loves me. Am I so passionate? I never thought so, but it seems I am, for –– but I am running on again madly and incoherently as usual.
Mary was not at the Library and I have not seen her to-day, for my over-sensitiveness prevented me from going there to revise.z Perhaps she did not want to come and so I stayed away. Yet I like to be with her very much, too much perhaps, for does not friendship or any other feeling indulged in, bring with it afterwards better memories or some sorrow at least? Yet Mary does me good, she is so kind and soft. How beautifully the sun is setting, after all the gloom and darkness of this rainy day; it cheers your heart to see the beautiful golden hues.
“Travailler toujours!” I finished Charl. Brontë’s Life, read Macaulay’s Lays of Ancient Rome, saw Mary, that’s all.
Sunday, I went to church, saw the pictures in Arti and read Tennyson’s Maud. 
I have to come on the th so the time is drawing near! Shall I pass,aa shall I not? Who knows! Mary goes on the same day, isn’t that funny. This morning I had a little chat with her aunt. She is so like Miss Gard, the same slender little figure, the same calm yet intellectual face, it is a pleasure to me to see her. What have I read? Tennyson’s Idylls, Jane Eyre, these are the only new things.
Passed!ab Both of us! Isn’t it delightful; I hardly can understand it as yet, and I feel so strange and unsettled that I don’t know what to do with myself. But oh can I be thankful enough for such a great blessing, it seems too good to be true, after two years of hard working and always looking forward to one and the same thing, suddenly to feel that it is gone – is a strange sensation. Well I have reached my aim now, and hope I may make a good and profitable use of it. And people are all so kind now! Yesterday more than sixteen people came to see me and Mary, then – Mr & Mrs Doorman. How kind, how good of them to come! And André wrote me such a nice hearty letter, my dearest, my own brother! Who knows how soon I shall see him, but I must now write and answer his letter, else it will be too late for the post. I am going to take a few days’ rest and then I must begin again to employ my time as well as I can.
To-morrow already a week since I passed my examination! I can hardly be thankful and grateful enough; but now the first exultation over, it must be over and I must grow more calm, settled and industrious. Beside that all the praise people give me, makes me vain and conceited; I think there is nothing more dangerous than flattery, for it is so sweet to hear and one grows so accustomed to it that it is hard to miss it afterwards. O I agree with Cole (whom I heard again this morning), people are by far more solicitous about their physical and worldly interests than about their spiritual. We take so much care of our bodies, and so little of our souls, and are they not more important! How I enjoyed his sermon! I wish I possessed a little, a very little of his conviction, of his faith in God. O if He lives and knows all about us poor human beings, how he must love Cole then, and cherish him and bless him above all others! For he is good and full of zeal to make the world better. If all people were like him there would not be much evil in the world – but then it would be like the Bee hive or knaves turned honest! But let me try to remember a little about his sermon. He read about Samson who slew the lion because he felt the spirit of the Lord coming to his aid, and afterwards he found honey in the carcass of the dead lion, for “sweet comes from evil conquered.” And all of us, we have our lions to conquer – religious indifference above all others, intemperance, profanity, ridicule, hypocrisy, and so many others. Unbelief, that worst of all lions, who yet becomes a kind of petted animal; he is stroked and petted and played with, like tamer does with the tame lion in his cage. He even puts his head in the lion’s mouth, for fun, for play, but at last the moment comes, the jaws are clasped together, the man is killed – unbelief instead of being conquered by us, conquers us and we are morally dead. And then he read the solemn words “Those who believe, shall be pardoned, God will love them and take them to his heart, – but those who do not believe are condemned!” Oh Lord, I then rushed to exclaim, but God is tender and merciful, how then can he be angry with me for not knowing him! But this is true – that such people are condemned in this sense that they feel unhappy, lonely, sad in this vast world without any support or aid from without, they miss that inward cheerfulness, that happy light which shines on those who are real Christians. I see it clearly in Mary; that and nothing else can be the reason of her always untamed cheerfulness and gaiety, whilst I am often melancholy, unsettled, and sad. Well I can only wait patiently and devoutly; “O God if thou really liveth, hear me, o take me back again among thy fold, take me back in your arms. I have been bad and have sinned against thee, make thyself known to me again, o Lord show me thy presence that I may believe in thee.” 
I had a very kind, nice letter from Miss Gard this evening, I wish she would educate me a little; I should become a better woman then. How I should like to peep in the drawing-room just now – of course she has been to church and is sitting quietly now near the fire, dear, dear Miss Gard I send you a kiss, do you feel it now at this moment!
Mr Dirks came back to-day from Chile, kind, healthy as ever. He has been out with André several times in Paris.––– 
How much has happened in that one week! I can’t fancy that it is about myself I am writing now and that this nervous, hesitating, perplexed person is the same who wrote so calmly and blissfully unconscious of everything. Last Sunday night Al. has proposed to me, he loves me so tenderly, so very, very much and I – what must I do! O if I only knew what to do. Spurn the hand so kindly offered, spoil my chance of happiness in life, and return to my old, calm life, or try and persuade myself to love him, for whom I felt nothing hitherto. To-morrow I must decide! What shall I do?
How many calm uneventful days of quiet meditation and deep, earnest thinking are past for me. I have had to decide upon my whole future life, to be a happy, married woman, rich and prosperous, or a lonely hard working governess yet free and independent. As yet my choice has been the latter, but I have not refused to think over A.’s proposal and to try whether I cannot love him. O may God help me to decide whatever is best and wisest! I read to-night “Vorstengunst” and it awakened in me all my ambitious dreams, all my illusions of being and doing something in the world, which had been slumbering these last days. O I must never again relapse in such a state of inaction and idle passiveness as I formerly did. Work, work untiringly and faithfully, God help me to fulfil my duty. And let me try to banish all bad, selfish, worldly thoughts, such as come so often in my mind. I feel sometimes so ashamed of myself, “watch and pray” must be my motto. The year runs towards its close, may the last weeks see a little improvement in me.
All my old hopes and illusions that have been slumbering so long in that time of hard exertion which left no time for other thoughts, are awakening again in my heart. Dreams of great things, of making men happier and better! But I must bide my time. I am too young, too unexperienced, too ignorant. But may I never lose the longing after it!
Another year gone! There is always some sadness in that thought. It can never come back with all its fears & anxieties, its pleasures & delights! For me it has been an eventful [time[?].ac The long planned stay in London, the exam, and my first proposal of marriage. Three great events truly. But they have left me all the same.
The new year opens with a merry sunshine, a good omen for all anxious hearts! What will it bring us? But it is no use speculating upon that! May it bring me work, hard but pleasant work, I should be so happy then. I shall try to undo myself of all bad habits, unkind thoughts, egoismad & uncharitableness; it must be for me an important year, for all my preparatory studies are now finished, I shall never be pupil again but must now begin as teacher!
Nearly a month passed, and not one line written! Oh that I could tear them out of the book of my life, these days and weeks past in idleness and wickedness. I have been miserable for myself and unkind to others, I have made everyone miserable! I am so sorry, so very sorry. Oh I ought to have written before, to have collected my thoughts sooner, it would have been better!
What have I done all that time? Finished Vorstengunst, read the life of Beethoven, Tristesses et Sourires, that’s all. Beethoven’s life is a splendid book; now only I can appreciate and enjoy his music. Al. has been here rather often and I grow more and more perplexed. It will be well for me if I go to England. I have written to the agent Mrs Pijpers named me, and armed with such beautiful testimonials as Mr v. Kampen has written for me I hope I shall get a very good place.
Mary has returned from Apeldoorn, I saw her in church last Sunday and we went home together, she was kind and nice as usual.
The day glides on in the same monotony nothing to record of myself; long days of sadness & inactivityae with an occasional outburst of former gaiety, that’s all. To-day I took up my Italian once more, though I can’t master the pronunciation all by myself. I yet can learn the words and the rules. Then if ever I go to Miss Gard again and she has an Italian among her boarders, I can speak with him! Dear, dear Miss Gard, last Sunday I had a letter from her, such a nice kind one! She told me her little love affair, an old widower who proposed to her! And he has only seen her for one week and only at breakfast! Wasn’t it funny?
Poor dear Mary has had a very sad thing happening to her. Mr Declerq died suddenly last Sunday night. It must be a great loss to her, I have thought of her all the day, poor dear.
More than half a year has passed since last I wrote in this book! What a change! Here I am at a boarding school in Elburg, a tremendous large house in a very small, little place, I who am only accustomed to large towns like Amsterdam & London. I am sitting opposite to Pauline Perrin, a young girl from Neufchâtel who interests me rather, for she has a determined look in her face and her manners are simple and unaffected. I think I shall like her better than any of the others. We have passed one long quiet Sunday already here, spent it in walking round the town and its nice surroundings, seeing the sea from far, dining in company with the two Misses Visschers and reading in the evening. To-day the boarders will arrive. What shall I do with all those girls, I who never taught before and am so accustomed to a free, easy life! But I shall do my best, for I wished it myself and I think a little discipline will do for me. I must learn not to think too much about myself but making things nice and happy for the girls; I hope they will like me.
After that stormy summer full of emotions & enjoyment, it will be a calm, quiet, monotonous winter but I think it will do me good. I shall write much, I hope, & study much & translate much, but before I can say much of the life here I must wait till school begins in earnest.
Yesterday afternoon the girls arrived and there was such a bustle and noiseaf in the house as I never heard before. Miss Perrin and I helped them to unpack, we ran up and down till at night. I was quite tired out. Then came that first night, sleeping with the girls, which I had dreaded so much but it came off better than I expected. There is one of the girls, Sijtske Mesdag, whom I like very much. Last night we took a walk and with a full heart she grasped my arm and chattered away very nicely. She seems an impulsive noble creature, – I like her well. Then there is a little coquette from the Hague, Koba Hajel, a dreadful, half grown up girl, who bears the beautiful name of Hulda, then stupid, fat, handsome Martine Waldeck, kind little Mary Webb and others. This morning I gave them the first lesson and it went off better than I had expected. Now I have one hour free and I use it quickly to write my journal, which I hope to keep truthfully. As yet but one letter from home, I so long to have another. O what a difference this uncomfortable life forms with my easy free life at home! There never was such a difference! What I dislike is the meals, they are so formal. Miss Cateau is a nice, kind, merry soul, all the girls dote upon her, Miss v. Holthe is not so nice as Pauline Perrin I think! Now already I am longing for the Christmas holidays. And it is such a long time still. Nothing eventful will happen in this time I am quite sure – I shan’t write every day. Mr H’s present I use every day and I think of him always; is it all a dream?– 
So many days have passed without my writing anything! But time glides out so quickly here in the midst of all these busy young lives who thrive & bloom around us, that hardly any time is left for meditation or quietness. I must say I am rather grown accustomed to things here, and it is not exactly unpleasant but will be dull & monotonous I am afraid this winter. I only hope I shall learn something, perhaps music & French or at all events I learn to teach now & especially class-teaching. I see that I have not yet written anything about Constanz Lüders, our German music teacher, and yet she fully deserves a description. She is plain yet elegant, I don’t think she is good, but she is clever & amusing and a very agreeable companion I think in our Elburg solitude. She is rather bold and asks everything from Miss Vrinte, who dares not refuse her, o what a lot of opposed characters are assembled in this house. They are all kept within bonds by strict rules, yet if we could look under that outwardly so calm appearance what conflicts & disturbances should we meet.
The greatest pleasure here is receiving letters; hitherto I only had from home, from Paris & one from Lena. What did it mean? Has A. asked her perhaps to keep up the correspondence that he still might have some news of me? I don’t think very often about him, but always of his father, especially at dinner-time. I wonder how Anne is doing and why she does not write! It is all still so strange here for me, the only thing I like is the sea; every afternoon from - we go for a walk, Constanz & Pauline & I, and involuntarily we always turn to the sea, the glorious waving, glittering, dark blue sea, the fresh wind blows away all the close schoolroom atmosphere, I wish I received some translation work from v. Maurik, the work in school does not suffice me.
Little Wim’s birthday – the first that I spend from home! Yet my thoughts are there & my best, best wishes, o I wish he may grow up to be a noble, wise man – he has great talent, I know, but also a passionate character. I fear that life will not be easy for him. 
And what shall I write about school? I must say that I am quite well accustomed now to everything.
We spent rather a nice evening yesterday, as it was Caroline’s birthday but then when we went to bed I could not sleep & paid a visit to Constanze, it was funny having a chat at midnight.
Yesterday I also had my first music lesson, I do wish I might learn to play a little better; at least I shall go back then wiser than I went.
I am sitting alone in the school-garden, enjoying the fresh autumn air of this lovely September day, and I try to write my journal but I have hardly anything worth writing. I am glad to have a little quiet around me for a moment and really with this beautiful weather the garden does not look bad at all.The vine on the wall has beautiful red tinted leaves, geraniums & roses are still blooming & the leaves are fresh & green.
Yesterday I had for the first time a long chat with Miss Visscher, for I could not bear the idea that Con was always with her, still I am afraid that cannot be prevented, and I must say that she is a clever & agreeable companion but I am afraid it will occasion difficulties. It is here the world on a small scale – all kinds of passions, of intrigues going on; under a mask of commonplace indifference. Two parties – Miss V. & Con & Miss C. with Pauline & I – it would occasion a civil war.. But we shall [try] to prevent it. Yesterday I had a nice kind letter from Mrs Doorman – with her photo – the nicest thing she could send me. I shall soon write to her but now I must go & write to Mary & Anne.
My birthday! And what a different one from all the others! Hitherto it has always been mother’s kisses which congratulated me first, and all the warm embraces of brothers & sisters, and now this morning when I awoke my cheeks were wet with tears, and I felt “not a bit nice” as Toddie says. But from out their beds the girls began to congratulate me, and in my dressing case I found already a nice bracelet from Con, Gonne & Pauline and when I came downstairs Miss Visscher gave me a box of notepaper & everyone seems so kind and loving that I must not feel unhappy.
As yet I have had no letters or parcels; that will be the greatest delight of all. I have been reading over what I wrote last year… and to the words “what will this year bring to me?” I could give an answer now. It has brought me a friend and a true, true love! I might say but alas the latter I have not or could not value much – but it has brought me work, for the first time I am independent now; one of my schemes has been realised and I feel happy in that. Is it right? I ask now and then or am I growing too self-sufficient for a woman, too independent. It can hardly be, though. My heart remains the same – here I have even grown softer and kinder than I was when I left home. A little adversity can do no harm – and life at school here is rather – well – not exactly adversity but with some hardships. If I were not so dreadfully jealous it would be much pleasanter here, for Con & Miss V. are still always together. Yet everyone is kind to me and I feel upon the whole happy.
I have not written since many days for there was so little eventful – so now I must give an elaborate account of everything as it probably will be long before I write again. Last week I enjoyed a delightful day at Nunspeet with Mrs v. Osselen, who had invited me to come & spend a day and night with them. They are great friends of the Scheffers & live in a lovely country house. I had a cosy little room with a vine covered window. In the evening we made music.As I am on dutyag from - the best thing I can do is to write a little in my diary. Of course I cannot write here every day for nothing eventful happens, still since the time I wrote last many things have occurred.
First there was the fear of scarlet fever, which was nearly declared epidemic in Elburg after Marietje Webb’s little brother having died of it. Those were sad days when that dread was hanging over us, yet I did not write it home for I knew how they would be frightened – and now it was only I who had to bear it.
With Miss Cateau I grow every day on better terms – we take a walk sometimes together, and she has told me all her love troubles and also her sister’s life. It is, as I thought, a life of continual drudgery and hardship, dull, monotonous, without any amusement to make it bright and happy, has rendered her narrow-minded, jealous longing for the love & happiness which to her have been denied – it is a strange character worth to be studied. Yesterday (Sunday) was rather a pleasah
– A quiet morning hour just fit to write my diary! Time glides on and only six weeks separate us now from the Xmas holidays. How we shall enjoy them!
Now what must I write? Two eventful things have happened for me. I have been invited to the house of Dr Wedekind and to Mrs Gericke, who (strange to say) proves to be the mother-in-law of Gonne Kehrer. Of course that topic brought us nearer together and I spent a most agreeable evening there, for they are all refined, cultivated, yet simple and it is a pleasant sight, the kind old mother with all her blooming girls around her. One – Louise – is certainly a little beauty and herself convinced of the fact, Hermine is plainer and devotes herself to study, Pauline is merry & Sophie, the youngest, is a little darling, I think I like her best of all. It is a pleasant idea to have made some friends.– I don’t feel quite well to-day for yesterday a splitting headache kept me in bed for some hours, but everybody was so awfully kind. Miss Cateau coming to me so often & Miss V. & Con too that I felt quite comfortable. The weather is lovelier every day. God tempers the wind to the shorn lamb!– 
I am sitting in the dining-room near the window, trying to catch some warmth from the pale winter sun that is shining in – and I am reading: Lewes, Life of Goethe. By want of some person to whom I can communicate my enthusiasm about it, I will try to tell it to myself, generally my enjoyment is unselfconsciousai – but that must not be.
“My scholarly pursuits, how sore they weigh,
Upon my heart and mind!” 
that expresses best of all my feelings for I feel awfully small in presence of all these great men.
I have just now read about Lessing, he attracts me most of all; calm, noble, self-assured,aj not a bit of the usual German fanaticism, he is the most imposing figure of that time, most grand but least human. No Frederike, no Lotte for him, about his life, his childhood, his youth, no particulars are told like of Goethe, and his works are not the reflections of his life, not “a confession”, but they are independently the fruits of much reflection & deep thoughts. Literatur: Briefe, Hamburger dramaturgie, Nathan der Weise, Laokoon. 
If ever I grow rich I must travel and go and see Weimar. O to have lived in Goethe’s time, to have known him! Poor Frederike, poor Lili, they paid that happiness rather dear; yet their short time of happiness was great enough to fill a whole life. I got just now a splendid idea in my head to go next summer to Paris and London! First a few weeks, two perhaps in Paris and then together with André to London. I hope I shall have money enough, then we must take M. too; they will say it is imprudent to wasteak our money in this way – but let us be young and happy for once and enjoy our life thoroughly.
How I am getting on here? I can’t tell, rather bad I think, Ial
The old year has glided into the new one without my writing a single letter. Here I am again in Amsterdam for the holidays – Martine has got scarlet fever in Elburg, all these things have happened, all anxieties & emotions of the last time in school are past and I hope we will begin after the holidays without peace being broken again. 
I have had a very, very kind long letter from Miss Kate and from all the girls I have had cards and letters which does my heart good, for it is a pleasant feeling when everyone loves you.
I have enjoyed or rather am enjoying my holidays exceedingly: I have been twice to the opera, to the theatre, to a lot of tea and dinner parties and we have fun for six as Hilda would say – but the best thing which happened in Amsterdam for me is that v. Maurik gave me another novel to translate. It is difficult but I hope I’ll succeed. What will this new year bring us again? Always the same question – never an answer. Ora et labora.
In Elburg again! Two weeks of unalloyed pleasure, & home comforts and home love, surely that is a fund upon which I can draw for a long time. How kind, how loving have they all been to me, o never have I appreciated their love for me enough. But now oh the contrast! Instead of being courted and made much of, instead of friendly voices and kind faces to welcome me here, only coldness and indifference. But Miss Kate is kind as ever and Gonne and the girls too – so I must be reasonable and not grumble. Surely after all that pleasure I can bear a little discomfort now.
At this moment I am sitting very warmly and comfortably in our room; my back towards the fire, all my dear books around me, Line is practising in the same room and sings my favourite songs; outside in the garden the snow lies still white and unspotted on the ground – sparkling in the sunlight – upon the whole I am well off now.
But I must not write too long, for my translation is waiting for me – so I had better turn to my Geschichte eines genies.
Again I am sitting quite comfortably and cosy in our room, I am quite alone this time; it is evening, the lamp burns brightly and I look over my small dominion with great pleasure.
This afternoon and yesterday, too, I have tasted a pleasure which I had not had for three years, namely skating. Hand in hand with Louise Gericke, I swept along the path, it was quite delightful! To-morrow we go again, but now I must work.
I have just finished my translation of “Geschichte eines genies”. I am so happy, and then that good news from home, about Henri, it really is too good to be true. I am so thankful, so deeply thankful. Yesterday I also had my first lesson with Mr Alblas, shall I ever get through that exam? 
A quiet evening hour again! Truly they are so rare that I must use them well – if only I had not such a splitting headache.
The life of Goethe is nearly finished now, and more than once I have been in ecstasies over it. I have also learned to appreciate Hermann und Dorothea now – a good sign at all events.
And I have learned Chopin’s Trauermarsch – – – –
Yesterday I received the communication of Lena’s marriage – and it has quite upset me. This night when I awoke I thought directly about it and it occupies me ever since. I must write to her to be sure – will she be happy? O if I could see for one moment what is going on in her heart; is she not anxious for the future, does she really love him who is to be her husband, is she really, downright happy? Only the future can tell, when shall I see her in her home? What a difference between her life and mine!
With Mary I am on the best possible terms. I wrote her once a long, long letter all about “Auld lang Syne”; about Gidi and everything and to that she answered so kindly and lovingly that we have renewed our bond of friendship and will be in future all in all to one another. She is good and tender after all, a little worldly – but not in her heart, I only wish I could look up more to her. I long for a letter from André; but I must stop, the bell rings for tea!
In A. they are at this moment all preparing for the party, Lena, Mary, everyone; and I am here all alone, reflecting in my solitude upon all the vanity of human gaiety and pleasure. Yet if I could only go; how I should like it! Perhaps it is better as it is; it is true that such kind of pleasure left me always dissatisfied; so I will only not grumble too much.
About one thing I am more than glad – I received the papers in which “geschiedenis van een genie” has been placed and I have just now finished another, shorter one by Paul Lindau which I hope v. M. will accept. Now I see that I have no mind to write, so I will only turn to my books or my music and wait for another quiet evening hour next week in which I can write my diary.
To-morrow home for the Easter holidays, what joy! An atmosphere of gladness pervades all the house, everyone is packing, bustling about and enjoying the prospect. What will they bring these few days?– – –
I’ve read the loveliest book, “Onder de menschen”; it’s awakened something like an ideal in me. Homer, Nausicaa, what magic there is in those words, that they soften my heart so wonderfully. So here I am again, the little girl, eager to learn, who turns her questioning brown eyes up to her teacher, who tries to reveal to her the beauty of the Odyssey, who tries to communicate to her something of his passion for theclassics. She seizes eagerly on every word that flows from his lips. Oh happy, oh blissful time of first love! Shall I ever feel what I felt then? Shall I ever again sense so much sunshine and perfume around me, feel as blissful as I did then? Sunny days, where are you now? How bare, how poor my life is now compared to then. Here I sit, in the prosaic dining room of a boarding school, surrounded by nothing but the trivial chatter of the girls, inharmonious tinkling on an out-of-tune piano – and my thoughts drift away to a sunny garden full of lilacs and chestnut trees in blossom and I hear again that unforgettable voice with its tone that for me was irresistible. “These lilacs are for Jo,” and for me a look that made me tremble with bliss.– But what possesses me to dredge up all those old memories, what do they have to do with me in these dreary, prosaic surroundings? There’s nothing of that adoring, happy child left in me. I’ve become dull and respectable and old since then – but oh, that respectability weighs so heavily! I would so love to write this evening but I can’t – I feel so profoundly unhappy – and I don’t know why – does everything have to happen again from the beginning, the doubt, the uncertainty, the bouts of despondency I had before? Was everything I went through and suffered during those years in vain? No. I’m stronger, I know more about what I want, I can bear more – but yet my thirst for happiness has been reawakened, the stupor I was in when I arrived here has gone – I’m starting to live again and what is life? To dream of love and wake to sorrow. – 
My thirst for happiness reawakened! Well then, yesterday, the day before yesterday and for a few days before that I was able to slake that thirst a little. What wonderful days I spent in Nunspeet! Who would ever have thought it! And how nice that hotel life is, and how enjoyable it was to be able to have a sensible conversation and be treated like a normal person, and not as the English Miss. And that delightful life in the country, those walks in the woods and across the heath, through the fields and along the lanes, that glorious refreshing smell of pine, that welcoming garden. Oh, how I enjoyed it. I even enjoyed myself in the company of that stupid man from The Hague, but what I liked most of all were the jolly evenings, grouped around the tea table on the veranda or later on in the living room, with me in the rocking chair, the others each in their own chair, pretending to read but talking without drawing breath. I think B. is very nice, strong, really manly, no longer boyish at all. I think he could be a bit tyrannical; even so he reminds me of André. How will that turn out with Anni? Sometimes I feel so anxious about it. I received a lovely letter from Anne Dirks. Poor An, what is in her heart? At the moment I find life in a boarding school insufferable; anyway I hope I’ll get used to it in the end! Perhaps I’ll go to Nunspeet again tomorrow; but would it be prudent?
What a series of lovely evenings. Henri popped in on Saturday evening, had a wonderful Sunday, I’m reviving again. Everything I’ve gone without this winter is now giving me twice as much pleasure – they’re real storybook days, as Lida would say. Those walks through the cornfields, the friendly village church in the distance, and on the other side the beautiful brown beeches of De Groote Bunte – and then it was time for a nice cup of tea together! I shan’t write any more, my work is calling me.
I’m sitting in my old place in the school garden again, where I sat so often last autumn; the red Virginia creeper has gone and now the wall is covered in white roses, one of which I’ve pressed as a souvenir. Miss C. is coming and will interrupt me so I’ll end here.
“The happy days in Aranjuez are over.” The family left Nunspeet on Saturday evening; Wim blooming and fit, Mien still a bit pale and exhausted, and I stayed behind on my own. I had a jolly evening and a delightful Sunday and now it’s over. That last stroll through the garden in the heavenly moonlight was the most delightful of all. Unconsciously I always go to the little hillock with the fantastic view over the waving wheat fields with the dark pine trees in the background. Everything slumbering in the silver moonlight – the exhilarating stillness – and (who can look at a July moon alone?) pleasant company – it was idyllic. No, but those days in Nunspeet – they were real storybook days.– I only felt down in the dumps in the afternoon while sitting at the table, I don’t know why – sometimes I’m suddenly in a quiet mood and there’s nothing I can do about it. Not long now and it will be the holidays. What will they bring? I have high hopes and I want to use them as well as possible.
A certain someone declared that I’ll return to N. one of these days. Will there be even more jolly days? What would he think of me, how foolish I am! I received the portraits of the children from Martha, intimate and warm, a lasting reminder of Nunspeet.– Im Wunderschönen Monat Mai.– 
I don’t have anything special to write – Gonne and I are sitting in the semi-twilight in our room, in front of me there’s a posy of poppies in a glass – they remind me of Gesa’s moonflowers in the history of a genius. It’s another delightful evening, but one’s not aware of it here indoors – here it’s cold and dark and dreary. I received a letter from Anni on Saturday. Will that be decided during the holidays or not? Will it be a good thing? Who knows? No letter from André, I’ll write to him this evening, and I also want to write to Anne; two weeks to go, hurray! Then we won’t be here any more. On this one remaining page I’ll only write when I’m going to Nunspeet, and then I’ll start a new one after the holidays.
“But something she yearned for by which her life might be filled with action at once rational and ardent.” 
I didn’t write anything about those last days in Nunspeet. They were pleasant, carefree – I was happy – and now – during those short holiday weeks I experienced more, enjoyed more and suffered more than during the whole year in Elburg. Dries was here, my boy, my pride, my darling. He was so nice to me, affectionate and intimate. I can still feel his arms around me when he whispered in my ear: “I really do love you best” and how lovely it was to sit and chat, late into the evening, yes into the night. And that day in The Hague, our drive in the woods, our visit, our trip to Scheveningen. Oh, what happy memories flood back. And on Friday evening we met Van Gogh and on Saturday the three of us saw the Museum again. How I enjoyed the paintings! And now gone, gone, and everything around me is cold and lonely and in my thoughts I follow them to Paris. Oh, why couldn’t I go too? Yesterday evening I was with Annie; poor child, she certainly needed comforting – please God make them happy. Another chapter has ended and so I can finish my diary. Now another year of patience before we see each other again, and so the years pass quickly and our life flies by and we become old, and how will it end? I feel profoundly melancholy this evening, alone, always alone with my thoughts but I must get the better of that feeling, I must become strong and start working hard, and get rid of that malaise – I want to work if everything disappears and goes away, if we always have to say farewell to what’s dearest to us – thank God duty, work is there and reaches out a saving hand to us.–
I want to open this diary without reflections; it’s a fact, sad but true, that the holidays are over and we’re back in Elburg. Now I have to work hard, get that examination behind me and then back to the civilized world, back to my beloved Amsterdam. I’ve moved into another room at Gonne’s, much cosier, I’m reading Heine.– 
Cold, harsh bleak autumn weather! Now that Miss Cateau is no longer here it’s twice as boring and miserable, I won’t stay beyond Christmas. I had a lovely time on Sunday in Nunspeet at the Itersons’; the weather was good, the woods were delightful, the company was most pleasant. Afterwards everything was just as miserable. I’m doing my best to work hard, but my thoughts keep wandering. I’m not being forgotten because I’ve received or letters , including one from Dries with his portrait. I’m so drowsy I can’t even write my diary.–
It has now been decided for certain that I leave at Christmas. Gonne and I told Miss O. on Sunday morning; for me the prospect of going home and enjoying life a little more is delightful; all the same I’ll find it hard to leave. Notwithstanding all the nasty things, I’ve also experienced much goodness and kindness here, but still I long for a little more diversion; it’s been terrible recently, and I can’t even concentrate on my work any more. I’d better get on – I’ve got nothing to write about anyway.
My new year’s eve! An evening full of melancholy, and pleasure, also memories and glimpses of the future! Time after time you come back and find me – always the same? No, I hope a little wiser, a little more sensible, a little richer in experience than last year.
My rd year has begun. As I write this I say to myself: right, the first flush of youth is behind you now, yet I still actually believe that people are mistaken, because I feel younger. But so it should be, the heart must always stay young, they say! There’s one thing I am glad about: that having reached my rd year I am at least independent; I’ve become a person now and meet at least the first requirement in that regard: I can keep myself.
I have changed, though, become very matter of fact. It’s been a long time since I felt as homesick and miserable as I did last year; I went to church this morning, then I read for a while with Gonne, then went for a walk and spent the whole evening playing games – actually I would have a thousand times rather have read some Heine or Potgieter, my two birthday presents – but after all it was not to be. The most enjoyable time was this morning in bed, when I opened the package from home and read all the loving letters, no one forgot me, and I also received other nice letters, and one really delightful one from Mr H., but most of them have yet to arrive tomorrow morning.
Now the new year has to be started with courage; the hand to the plough, work hard, be gentler, more sensible in my conduct to others and always Ever Higher!–p Amen.– –––
The days are passing faster and faster; I read a lot, Dries sent me a lovely package of books and the sweetest letter; books help me to pass the time, so it’ll be Christmas before I know it.– Today I received Annie’s portrait, their engagement is now a fait accompli, how can this be, does Dries suddenly love her so much? Shall I ever love her as a sister? How will things turn out? Time will tell.
I received a most charming letter from Lize van Gogh. What made her do such a thing? I answered her as best I could; I have high hopes of our acquaintance. My work is going so-so, I read too much instead of learning; will it ever turn out well? What a lot of questions; I’d rather go to sleep now, because what I’m writing is boring and banal. I read “Elsie” again – how very sweet it is.
I’m prosaic all week long, work hard and allow myself little pleasure, but on Sunday evenings I let a stream, a flood of poetry flow into my heart, and then I get Marie W. to sing all her songs first, preferably “Schöne Wiege meiner Leiden”, that profoundly melancholy, passionate song by Goethe; then I read, all the old dreams and thoughts arise again; I feel my old self: sweet, sad, unhappy – no, serious. It’s my old Sunday feeling: how well I remember it, how on Sunday evenings at home while Pa and Mien played I always took a book, preferably poetry, and then, borne on the double wings of poetry and music, my mind drifted, where to? Precious Sundays, how welcome you are to me, even here where you bring with you no distractions from outside whatsoever, not a single so-called amusement. I still think about how this summer in Nunspeet I walked alone through the corn fields in the early morning. “I am lonely and abandoned”. 
This morning I read Langs een Omweg, which certainly put me in a good mood for the whole day. It’s a book where an exalted noble mind speaks, such literature “lifts us out of ourselves”. Actually one should begin every morning by reading something good; how much better everything would be. Now I’m going to read some more of Potgieter’s Rijksmuseum this evening. For what else shall I write? It’s certain that I’ve been living an unnatural life recently, yet I’m a bit concerned about going back to Amsterdam, in that hectic maelstrom. I always feel better here, calmer.
Could people like Egbert Witgenstein exist? Would he have been the ideal of Mrs Bosboom-Toussaint when she was still a poor governess?– 
After a stormy, horrible time, finally some relief again! I’ve been to Nunspeet, will that have been the last time? I always ask myself this anxiously, when the carriage turns the corner and the doctor’s house with the brown beech trees has disappeared from view. Oh Nunspeet, wonderful Nunspeet, if only I could glorify you in a song, what magic there is in those pine woods, in that broad avenue and that welcoming doctor’s home! I enjoyed yesterday; I still see myself siting there in that friendly back room, while the strains of the lovely “Im wunderschönen Monat Mai” drifted through the room and Van den Bergh, sitting just opposite me listening as attentively as me. Might he also have been thinking about the lovely summer evenings in the woods, when we hummed it together? Yet I didn’t feel completely at ease, I don’t know what the reason was, but I wasn’t in the mood. Do they think me very dull? I’m afraid they do. After dinner we were in the hotel for a while and I practised the noble game of billiards; what a lot of things I’ve done in that hotel. Constance and I put the little ones to bed; Beb was an absolute angel in her long white nightgown; what a joy it must be to have such precious children. But the poor little woman isn’t up to it, she’s too weak. She should have better help. I believe that it’s a happy marriage. I always curse myself on a day like that for being such a useless piece of furniture in the cosy family parlour for I can’t contribute anything to the enjoyment of others; if only I could play the piano better.
When I arrived home this morning after a lovely drive, I found another letter from Lize van Gogh. Our friendship is making surprising strides; she describes my discussion of The Mill on the Floss as masterly criticism; how sensitive we humans are to a little flattery; that’s what I best remember from her letter. She enclosed a poem entitled “Autumn Thought” from which I want to write out the following couplet, it’s so perfectly appropriate:


Is it because the happy,
lovely days of summer
With laughter, love and delight
have passed us by so fast! 

Oh beautiful summertime, how fast you flew by.
Lize advises me to write down my thoughts in rhyme, it’s impossible for me. I would like to write, but I don’t have the desire, for everywhere one runs into unsolved mysteries, impenetrable secrets; the closed veil, that is spread out over birth and death, they can’t lift me up, so what good does it do to announce those few truths, to tell those ordinary things, which everyone knows. Shall I ever actually be able to achieve something good? I feel downright happy again at the moment, something that hasn’t happened to me for a long time, because I’ve been through a great deal of suffering. Still, after my day in the country I’ve changed my mind about the idea of always wanting to live in a city; the countryside has so many attractions!–
I recently sent a real complaining letter to Marie; sometimes I just have to get things off my chest; I received a letter from Lena on Saturday but there’s always something bitter in her letters, will she ever forgive me for purloining her Albert’s heart, even though it was absolutely not my fault? These days I’m a lazy diarist. Gonne and I are going to read De Delftsche Wonderdokter, we’re enthusiastic about Mrs Bosboom-Toussaint. And now enough for today and back to work.
The days I still have to spend in Elburg are numbered; that’s why I want to write now and again, so that I can remember this period clearly later on. Later! What will that be, where shall I be then, what will happen to me? Useless questions; oh, being so engrossed in the future! Yesterday I received two lovely letters, one from Lize van Gogh, who in return for my confidences told me her life story, also a tale of unrequitedq love, of course, and one from Mary; really sweet and affectionate as always; it did my heart good. Nette has to sing in Leiden on Friday evening. Marie writes: she’ll look beautiful in a white lace gown, and I don’t doubt it. What a life that Nette has. My head would’ve been spinning long ago! I went skating for a while on Sunday, but otherwise it was a dull Sunday; everything is dull here compared with the fun and bustle and gaiety in Amsterdam, I feel it much more than last year. Beb had a party for her birthday; I remember that when she last had one it was just a dinner at Triche’s, and I was still in the full ecstasy of my first love! Marie writes that Demmers is so much like Gidi; I don’t like such reproductions. How I long for a nice, cheerful environment, where I can at least gather some sustenance for my mind! I’ve become really slow-witted here recently.
Anne passed her examination and I believe is still staying with us, how very glad I am for her, she worked so long and so hard for it; what will she do now? I’m longing to see whether she’ll ever marry Veth; I hope so with all my heart. Saturday, a week until St Nicolaas. I’m looking forward to it like a small child; I’ll write again on the Sunday after, so until then I bid my diary farewell!
I didn’t write anything the following Sunday but now – I didn’t want my last Sunday to pass without writing something about it. A strange feeling that last! How many Sundays have I spent here, how I have sat thinking and dreaming over my books and letters, all those walks in the Wunderschönen Monat Mai, in the glowing summer heat and the lovely days of autumn.
The real desire to write isn’t here yet! I’d like to wait until the last evening but I have to pack and my diary has to go in my case. So let me take my leave of Elburg with these lines! A look back!– – small innocent pleasures, girlish confidences, silly trifles, but also many serious discussions, and furthermore much that I learned from those children who supposedly had to learn everything from me, no, my stay here has not been useless! Oh, may remember them always in Amsterdam, those lessons of simplicity, of humility, of satisfaction, and may I appreciate my home twice as much now that it’s waiting for me with open arms. How privileged I am that so many good things await me, how could I ever be dissatisfied!
Today I was in Nunspeet, and now definitely for the last time. It was Constance Schut’s birthday, the room looked really festive, the children were in their best clothes, little Beb in particular looked cute in light blue and offered me her mouth to kiss in the most affectionate way. Mrs Van Osselen was also very sweet; I left the place where I had spent so many enjoyable days with a pleasant impression. The setting winter sun gave the bare landscape a friendly air, the blue haze in the distance seemed to me to be my future shrouded in mist – on that lonely return journey I dreamt to my heart’s content.
This evening four of us sat together cosily again in the twilight, just once more and then we scatter to East and West. Shall we ever see one another again? My dear little Mary, my sensitive, clever Toos whom it was so pleasant to work with, and last but not least Gonne! They’ve all captured a place in my heart. God bless them all! And now, Elburg and Nunspeet: farewell. In Amsterdam, though, I shan’t write much in my diary. All the same, I want to keep my story up to date for better or worse, so that later on I’ll be able to look back and say: although it was slow, I won in the end, I made some progress!
Kinsbergen farewell!
Now I’m sitting in our small, cosy living room again and I can hardly believe that I was still at Kinsbergen last week. I’ve begun my entry into A. with a Greek tragedy, Antigone, and yesterday evening I heard a performance of Samson in Toonkunst, so in this last couple of days I’ve enjoyed more culture than in all my time in Elburg, but I’m already tired of it. I often think of our quadruple alliance, with Mary and Tooske and Gonne, that small, tranquil environment in which so much love and kindness prevailed; here everything is one hubbub and commotion. I hope I’ll soon get used to it. And now I’ll have to do my best, work hard, read everything but above all and in the first place for the examination. I shan’t write much in my diary, though, there’s not much opportunity here.
The room is full of the fragrance of the violets that were sent to us from Paris; Beb is singing the Weihnachts glocken, outside the moon is shining a soft and friendly light, I think it has a special glow because it’s Christmas Eve – and in my innermost self, where it was otherwise rather stormy today, peace and quiet have now settled.
Peace and goodwill to all mankind. Oh friendly Christmas, you always make your influence felt. I’m dissatisfied with myself, since I’ve been here; it has to change – but how? There’s a new face at the door, friend, a new face at the door! Make a better start in the new year!
I think a lot about Gonne and Mary; I received a gorgeous Christmas card from Lize v. Gogh, a white rose! 
The year has become .– This first month is already nearly half over, and not yet a single quiet moment to write something in my diary! No New Year’s Eve musing – no New Year wishes. Now I’m sitting in Hen’s little room again, for the first time planning to work, but before I begin, a few words in haste. I recently met Lize van Gogh, she’s a lovely girl, with a most melodious voice; tomorrow evening Rie and I are going to have tea at Lena’s – how amusing – and on Sunday morning I heard Cole again. And that’s all the news. Like old times, he’s been able to put me in a gentle and calm mood, he radiates something peaceful that does me good! And now down to work!
The months are flying by; I barely have time to collect my thoughts! How I’ve enjoyed myself recently! First that pleasant evening at Toonkunst, when Nette sang: Schöne Wiege meiner Leiden, then later on we did laugh so and then E. very companionably took me home, then times without number to the theatre, finally just a week ago – the grand party in the Paleis, where I waltzed with E. so delightfully (I hadn’t been to a dance for years). Listened to Sarcey on Saturday evening, yesterday evening the opera Lakmé. How I enjoyed it; slowly but surely I’m becoming my old self, I feel enthusiastic again, I can laugh, cry, go into raptures again; thank God I’m not yet completely and utterly frozen inside as I thought at first. But I’m beginning to daydream and brood again – and that’s wrong, I’m too old for that now. I had a lovely chat with Rie yesterday; she’s coming again tomorrow afternoon, I must have some fun and make good my losses. I feel an irresistible urge to abandon the examination, but I will not be so feeble, yet I won’t pass, there are so many things I don’t know, and my head is so confused these days.
Bad news about Dries. My poor boy is ill in Maison Dubois, perhaps he’s thinking of me at the moment; is he very lonely and longing for us? Or does he think only of Annie? How disappointed I am with Annie, she’s so dull and quiet; we can’t get on together at all, how strange that is! Would she really be a good wife for him? Time will tell. But now I have to get down to work, no more writing this evening; no more thinking about my evening walk yesterday; might he be thinking about it?
In fact spring has started but it’s still just as bleak and cold as the middle of the winter; will it never end? Spring must come. What shall I write? Reminiscences of the ball? The masked ball belongs to the past; it was delightful, enchanting: five dances with E., I was quite indifferent to the others but still dancing is delightful in its own right; now it’s over, for a long time, perhaps for ever. Who knows where I’ll be next year, in any event I’ll be a schoolmistress through and through, who no longer thinks about dances etc. Oh my peaceful Elburg, how much safer a hiding place you were for me; how calm and contented I felt there, and now? How come I’ve been so foolish as to almost lose my heart again? It’s nonsense. A week ago we had a lovely time skating the whole day long at the IJsclub; tomorrow evening to the theatre again, I’m going out too much. So now in God’s name get down to work.– Oh that examination!
More memories of the ball! Nette sang at the Deutsche Verein on Monday evening and we all went together, afterwards a social gathering – dancing of course – another jolly evening among the many we’ve had this winter. Spring has finally arrived, today it’s warm and balmy outside, the sunshine animates us – a wonderful period is coming. Another three weeks and at least I’ll have some rest – whether it’s an enjoyable, well-earned rest or a compulsory one, time will tell. Now to work.
It was still a bitter spring when I last wrote, now it’s “the fullness of time”, now we’re in the delightful, beautiful summer. Has much happened in that time? I wouldn’t want to relive it. Those weeks that Dries was here were torture for me. I suffered during that period. Oh what will I do without my boy, I can’t do without him, I love him heart and soul, Dries, Dries, do I mean nothing to you anymore? 
Yesterday I received a despairing letter from Anni, my poor darling, you too, does love always have to bring sorrow and torment – and disturb the peace and break hearts? Oh, if only we could be comforted by the English verse: “Love may go hang”, how much more peaceful and better it would be for us. Marie is staying in the country at Meeninck. I hope she doesn’t stay away very long.
This evening I read an article in the Gids about Huet by Quack: alas during the period when I didn’t write, he passed away at the beginning of the wunderschönen Monat Mai, the talented author, our great critic, our one and only Huet. I wept over his death, I loved him from afar without ever having met him, I should have dared to speak to him, I would have been at ease with him, I feel it. The next time I’m in Haarlem I’ll make a point of finding his house in Cleverlaan and the tranquil Sorghvliet in Bloemendaal. How I should love to talk to Dries about Quack’s article one day – but I don’t dare write about it! 
I mustn’t forget to mention that I’ve resumed my career as a schoolmistress since May, I’m now at Miss De Holl’s school. That says it all – and the holidays will soon be here, that’s the best of all. Now enough for this evening!
The holidays are now a thing of the past; if I wanted to write a lot about them I’d recount my wanderings through Haarlem, the wonderful organ concerts, walks in Bloemendaal and the Kolkje – but I don’t have much time! I want to recall only one day, a picnic in Vogelenzang a couple of days ago. It was a warm summer’s day – full of sunshine and scents, full of love and poetry! The memory of it does me good. Now to face the autumn and winter with courage.
Another birthday has been and gone – and this time it was particularly pleasant. I hadn’t been home for two years so it was doubly nice to see all those friendly faces and affectionate people around me. And the children at school spoiled me – a bouquet, a small basket of flowers, a silver brooch – it was truly too much. In the afternoon Marie, To, E. etc. ate with us – I didn’t enjoy it as much as I’d expected – it was my fault because I was very tired and a bit drowsy.
Another new year has started – who alone has understood what I was missing? Mr H., he’s wished me everything I don’t have – love, devotion, a goal in life – oh may I achieve it!
Whenever I have a quiet evening ahead of me and want to start work, I instinctively stray to my diary. Yet I have nothing special to report – always the same old song – dissatisfied with myself! And this time I have good reason – I’ve been more selfish than ever recently, indifferent, unfriendly to everyone at home, I’m not achieving anything – frittering away my time –have no objective in mind – things must change! But how? As long as I’m at school everything’s all right but the evenings! Then I’m tired and listless, then I want to work but don’t. Oh, wanting to but not doing it! I won’t spend long brooding about it, but now really begin for once!
Anne is back, and still everything between us is as it was before. Marie is just as sweet and affectionate as ever, but there will be a change in my relationship with her, too! She perhaps engaged soon, I with something that always makes me strained and withdrawn, when I’m there. Anyway! Things are not bad!
“Write as the heart forces you to write”; I would like to echo De Génestet with a minor variation. Curious! All sorts of thoughts criss-cross my brain, it’s full, overfull, I think, I only need to take a pen and streams of eloquence will flow on to the paper – – – and I’ve barely sat down in front of the paper when everything runs away as fast as it can and my thoughts hide so well that even I can’t find them again. And I, someone who still flatters herself with the hope of becoming a writer. It’s ridiculous.
I’ve just read Hugenholtz’s Karakterbeelden, the names of his subjects, Michelangelo, Carlyle, attracted me immensely, but oh, what a disappointment! Actually I shouldn’t say it because I would never, ever be capable of writing as he does – but nevertheless I can feel so clearly what he lacks – all originality, all freshness. He makes them so tame, his heroes, so good; he’s just made them fit the frames he wanted to put them in: he considers everything from a “religious” point of view and that alone is dismal enough. All the same, I’m being very ungrateful again because I have his book to thank for many good impulses, he shook me and reawakened the old “hero worship”. Oh why have I slumbered for so long, why have I missed so much, so much? If only I had someone who worried about me, or rather worried about my mind, someone who urged me to study and think, who showed me the way, who gave me books, but oh, perhaps it’s better as it is. “Human being, you will seek yourself and you will find it in yourself, in your head, in your heart,” yes, that’s all I know: how like De Génestet I am this evening. I want to plunge headlong into Goethe, rich legacy, I’d like to learn from him how to truly be a person; I would like to learn from Carlyle the calm resignation with which he bore worldly affairs – and instead of that I have to study morphology and Dutch history, because “I’m learning my exam,” as Multatuli’s Fancy says. So be patient, it will end too, patience and hope! Another year is speeding to its end, the last month has started, New Year’s Eve is there threatening me, I have myself to blame for much, much, as opposed to so little, so very little that’s good. A year ago I was still in Elburg; then I expected nothing but benefit from Amsterdam and now? Yet I wouldn’t like to go back now, I would suffocate from a lack of air and space for my mind!
Poor Jane Welsh, I feel sorry for you, I pity you profoundly and yet I envy you! I must read Sartor Resartus again before the year is out; it will do me good.
Instead of Sartor Resartus, I read Anna Karénine – it triggered all my slumbering emotions, I read it with enthusiasm, passionately – until now, halfway through the second volume, I have developed a certain reluctance that I would like to analyze but can’t. I ask myself, what’s the purpose of the book? To paint the sad consequences of a criminal passion? I pity Anna profoundly, do not condemn her at all, but thank God a situation like hers doesn’t generate enough interest in me to be able to follow it to the end. No, the edifying aspect of the book is the spirit of truth, of abandoning all the unnaturalness and affectation personified in Levine. Is it possible to imagine anything finer than his discussions with his brother Serge, the poet, in which the latter with his greater knowledge and eloquence always gets the better of him, but in which we nevertheless finally always have to award the victories to the defeated Levine. How correct are both their views of nature, Serge admires the beautiful effect of sunlight and moonlight on the trees – Levine looks on nature as something other than a place to relax and enjoy oneself – first after work, tiring, fatiguing work, it gives him the prize won with difficulty – peace and quiet in his innermost self, as on that day he spent in the field with his reaper, while Serge is at home drinking iced lemonade and reading newspaper articles. For the rest, all the people are commonplace in the extreme, Dolly in particular, and yet how touchingly that caring, fretting housewife is drawn. But I wanted to know what good this book has done for me. It has taught me (at least for as long as the impression lasts) to analyze my feelings more and to account to myself for my actions. If I’m in a bad mood and feel unhappy – I begin to ask: why? and what can I do to make improvements? and that, I hope, is a step on the way to changes for the better. If I feel cheerful and agreeable, that mood also has to be analyzed and thus appreciated more. Would that be prudent? Give it a try!
Now that I’ve finished Anna Karénine I can answer the question: what is the purpose of that book?
Levine’s doubt, uncertainty and despair, how wonderfully they resolve themselves on the last few pages. He feels what it is that gives value to life, and that conviction reconciles him with it, makes him happy, but they are so deeply buried in his innermost self, he knows with such certainty that there will always be a barrier that cuts off his soul from fellowship with others, even with that of his wife, that he doesn’t even make an attempt to tell others. His faith won’t be able to change anything in his character either, sometimes he will be angry, surly and indifferent to his surroundings, he will blame himself for thousands of mistakes but nevertheless – his soul will no longer be a plaything for each and every influence, which comes from outside, and he knows for what and why he lives – it’s faith.– 
Anton took an examination and on Monday he threw a delightful party in his room, or rather I couldn’t actually have cared less but we talked so pleasantly on the way there at Cras, and in the evening on the way home; why am I thinking about it? How stupid of me. I’m exhausted and lethargic – thank God a week’s rest starts tomorrow – Christmas holidays!
How I’ve changed! No more New Year’s Eve musings! Well, Dries truly no longer needs to accuse me of sentimentality. Christmas, New Year’s Eve and New Year, everything’s over – over – time flies. On Christmas Day I was in Scheveningen and saw Mr Dirks for the last time; he died the following morning – that dear, good man, I can’t believe that I’ll never see him again; all his fame, his knowledge, his genius are gone, what good did they do him? He lies there in the churchyard; now he is still remembered in the family but otherwise, oh, how quickly forgotten – it’s bitterly sad! 
The ice has made me forget everything recently – what a wonderful time we had skating. January e.g., in this dreadful weather, in gusts of snow, and yet what fun it was!
I’ve read Dostoyevsky’s L’Esprit Souterrain, also a study about Balzac by Bijvanck. Oh, if only I didn’t have to spend my evenings slogging through all that awful examination work, how happy I would be. E. lent me something rather different, by Heine, sometimes we can have such a nice chat! He also gave me an article in the Revue by Richet to read – that did me a lot of good – but I didn’t understand a lot of it, I hope that we’ll have an opportunity to discuss it at length one day. I really like listening to him!
I went to the masked ball as Little Red Riding Hood; what a long time I spent thinking about it beforehand, how quickly the evening was over! When I re-read my diary from time to time I find that I’ve only noted the amusements; a stranger who reads it would think that I’m a real merrymaker. Oh heavens, and I feel so dull, so desperately dreary inside. Only a good book can cheer me up. At the moment I’m reading Richepin’s Braves Gens; and it’s doing me good. Henri’s in a sad mood again, it creates a sense of oppression in the house that weighs on Pa in particular and that everyone feels more or less. Oh, life is hard. No, no, it’s me who needs to change, let me at least try to do my best again to be good, I’ve not done anything about it for ages and that’s why I’m so discontented. And now, in heaven’s name, back to work.
My heart is full of sadness, and now that I’ve done my best to control myself all this time, I finally want to entrust everything to my diary. It was Saturday evening ( February) when I went happily and cheerfully to Marie’s as usual to spend an evening with them “in the snuggery”, as Nette had said just that afternoon. When I got there, Dientje told me at the door that “Miss Cateau” was dead! To dead, our dear, witty, cheerful Topsy. Oh God, yes it’s true, she’s passed away; I’ll never see her again with those lovely brown eyes, that bright smile on her lips, that lovely black hair. Now she lies in the cold earth at Zorgvlied, alone, alone day and night, buried – under flowers – yes, but still buried and we’ll never, never see her again. This morning I sat at her grave with Mien, the wind blew gently through the bare trees, which stood out so delicately against the clear spring sky, the Amstel flowed so blue and so fresh past the churchyard and the dewdrops on the flowers glistened in the sunshine; everything was so beautiful and so fresh, and now she’ll never see it again, the flowers will come and she’ll never see them again, oh why, why is life so cruel, so hard?
She could have done so much good, she had such a noble, loving heart, everyone who knew her received an impression of the spirit of love and goodness, which radiated from her, I always felt better after being with her, then I felt ashamed of myself, of my sloth, my selfishness, I needed her so badly, I always longed to see her again. Oh, I shouldn’t complain, during those first days I only felt grief for the others, for my poor, dear Rie, who loved her heart and soul, I could only weep with her, hold her tightly in my arms even more lovingly than before – but what good does it do; I can’t compensate for her Topsy. And her poor father and mother, and E. Oh, I feel so for what he’s lost in her; I’ve missed my boy all the time for years, every hour of every day, his place has never been taken by anyone, but he still lives, he writes to us, he comes to see us, now and then – I see him and hear his voice – but her – never again, never! I see her lying before me, first in the small, iron bed with the snowdrops in her hand that Bert had brought for her, and later downstairs in E’s room with all those flowers and wreaths around her, and roses and camellias in her lovely dark hair, it was the most beautiful scene I’d ever witnessed – none of those dismal symbols of death;she lay there so calm and peaceful, so pure, so innocent, I wanted to stay with her forever, I couldn’t tear myself away. That last farewell was the hardest, goodbye Topsy, my dearest, a kiss on that cold forehead – and then – nothing.
How much suffering a person can bear; how did they get through them, those days, above all the day of the funeral! I can still hear her poor mother sobbing; oh it’s much too terrible, much too hard! I’ve spent as much time with them as I could – in joy they’ve always called me and asked me to join them – now it was my turn to come and ask, oh let me at least be with you in your grief! And if all the strange people upset Marie, we went somewhere else together, and sat very close to each other and we talked about her and we recalled everything loving and good she said and did. And sometimes E. came with us too and then we hugged one another really hard and said: “Oh, let’s cherish one another because life is so short and everything happens so quickly and then nothing but memories remain.” Happy are those who are remembered with so much devotion, so much warmth and so much love as she! Dearest we’ll always think about you and talk a lot about you, you’ll always be with us. And – I thank you for all the love you showed me, I thank you for the good things that you awakened in me, you always did me good – God bless you for it!
It’s been a hard, bitter lesson for me to rid myself of my terrible selfishness, to be nicer and friendlier at home and at school, too, to have a goal in life again – this goal: to be something for other people. Oh let me never, ever forget it!
It’s E’s birthday! How differently I’d imagined it – and now: I didn’t go there this afternoon, I couldn’t, because I thought all those boring strange people would be there, I did go for a while straight after dinner, but it was full and unwelcoming. I went to his room for a moment to see how the frames looked on his desk; on one side there was To, on the other side the flowers that she had painted in my album. Would he ever think of me now and then when he looked at them? Oh, he’ll miss her so much, and I can do nothing for him!
Now Nette’s ill! Oh, well may we say “there is much distress in this house”. I’d like to be with them all the time, after all I pop in almost every day – but there’s so little I can do for them! E. and I have started a complicated discourse, always by letter, about Heine. It sounds crazy but we never see each other for long enough to be able to talk something through properly. His letter did me a lot of good – I want to read it again carefully first and then I’ll reflect on it.
Even so, we’ve misunderstood each other – he thinks that I condemn Heine because he’s an atheist and therefore I don’t want to hear what he says about religion – and I meant to say that as a person Heine is not serious enough for me to grant him the right to teach me. Goethe, e.g., strove for perfection in everything, he took life seriously and he had an objective that was high and noble. Although he often strayed and perhaps made just as big mistakes as Heine, the spirit in which he worked was good and that’s why I want to learn from him. Heine, on the other hand – I don’t condemn him – on the contrary: I pity him, he couldn’t help being weak and selfish, but did I detect anything in his works that tends towards exalted idealism! To be quite honest, no. I certainly haven’t read him properly. I also have a singular way of reading. First of all I make an image of the person for myself through biographies or criticism by others – when I read his works later on it is not to find his ideas in them but himself, a peculiar distinction perhaps but nonetheless a distinction and as such my impression of Heine has always remained the same and has not yet been changed by his works.
As usual I was with Marie on Sunday; it was a miserable, rainy day and my heart drove me to her, for I understood that she must be even sadder and more dejected than normal. We went upstairs together and knelt on the floor in front of To’s bookcase. We spent the afternoon in the company of the books she loved so much, thinking and talking about her. I can still see her on her birthday with all those slim volumes by Schérer in in her arms, which she looked at with pride and regarded so longingly – I’ll keep them until after my examination, she said then. Oh, she never read them at all. 
We found all her treasures: the pearls she wore at the masked ball, her fan and the flowers she wore – it was profoundly melancholy.
After dinner Marie went downstairs with Jan – how odd that I haven’t written a word about Marie’s engagement, everything has been so different recently. I sat in the large chair with E. next to me: it was a lovely interlude; he was so nice and friendly to me – I’ll have to make that pleasant memory last a long time. Exactly a week ago this evening we brought Clare Conen home or rather to the hôtel. She’ll go home at Easter, and then Nette goes to Zutphen, how quiet things will be for my poor Mary!
Dries is coming on Saturday, it’ll be so lovely to see him again – but oh, I wish he was coming alone. He never writes to me any more, does that mean he doesn’t love me any more? My boy, my dearest, I’ll never forget you!
Dries’s visit is a thing of the past; it brought me a few happy hours and many sad ones – oh, I feel it more deeply than ever: the relationship we had between us before can never, never return. He does say that he still loves me a lot and I want to believe it – but what good is a love if it’s not shown, we no longer live together. Annie stands between us; I’ve sensed it for a long time without daring to admit it to myself and now it’s obvious and clear to me – I no longer mean anything to him and I never will again. Everything that happened before seems like a dream now – what a wealth of wonderful memories, there isn’t a single image from my youth to which he isn’t linked – those memories can never be erased, from his mind or from mine; later, when we’re both very old, perhaps we’ll recall them. Very old – I hope I never am, it’s very wrong to say so, oh, my outlook on life is utterly and completely wrong at present, but I can’t help it. Life is so difficult and so full of sadness around me and I have so little courage! I’m very alone; Marie too, has been lost for a long time, to me at least. When I’m at their house she’s usually out; I spent yesterday evening with her mother to keep her company. She told me all sorts of things from the past; I do like listening to people talking about their youth. And I popped into E’s room for a moment to return Le crime et le châtiment. He was working with Mendes – I would have liked to sit and talk with them for a while, but I didn’t dare to. He promised to lend me La peau de chagrin; I don’t actually understand why he still wants to speak to me because I can never give him a proper answer and everything in my head is confused compared with his distinct, clear mind.
On Sunday we’re all going to Zorgvlied, the grave is now ready with her signature Cato on a white marble gravestone. And that’s all that remains of her!
Just Dirks is gravely ill, it seems as though all our friends and acquaintances are being pursued by fate – it makes me fearful and I ask myself: will we be spared? We’ve also had anxious days with Henri – but thank God everything is as it should be again. I haven’t being feeling well myself over the last few days – so today I didn’t go to school. The little Holl will have to manage without me for a change – particularly in the drawing lesson. I’m longing to leave the school – but what then?
I’m going to read a little Heine, that will keep me amused. And outside it’s so hopelessly miserable and rainy that I must refresh myself a bit.
I hardly dare write this date for – nature is so completely topsy-turvy that it seems like November. The calendar tells us about zephyrs and rays of sunshine vom wunderschönen Monat Mai, but I’m thinking with melancholy about a fur collar and the stove! Everything’s confused!
I was at Zorgvlied on Sunday morning – violets and forget-me-nots are growing on her grave now; Topsy, my dearest Topsy!
Marie’s engagement will be made public after Whitsun – then I’ll be completely alone. I’m going to immerse myself in my books again – that is after all the most delightful. I very much enjoyed La peau de chagrin and it was the basis of many discussions between me and E., or rather, he talks to me, and I listen and save it all up so I can think about it some more later. He’s positive and yet a little fanatical, he is so completely self-absorbed but is still so attached to his mother and as tender as the most sensitive young girl. He’s almost too good, but now and again I’d like to give him a good shaking to confuse him and make him seem more like an ordinary person. If only he knew what I’m writing here! He also has imagination, but that’s what they all have and today I’m furious with him and I wish I could think of a way to really tease him. When will he bring me the book, I wonder, and the pencils. His pencil is a talisman for me, a better one than the peau de chagrin! If I’m dispirited at school and lazy and horrible, I hold it very tight for a moment and think: he’s never like this – and usually it does me good.
What’s made me write down all this nonsense!
Let me think instead about yesterday evening when I read the sermon by Domela Nieuwenhuis to Mrs Ten Sijthoff and her blind sister. It was a typical evening, I really like something like this; they talked so warmly about what I read and it was so tranquil and calm in that big room! And yet Anne is always melancholy; she certainly has sorrow – oh, who doesn’t! But with them I felt so cheerful; the idea of being of some use, no matter how small, has such a reassuring, cheering effect on me that I’m a different person. I’m beginning to think seriously about becoming a nurse – but they won’t want me to and I shan’t be strong enough. But then at least I’d be happy. Happiness, what’s happiness? It’s all up to us, and as long as I do my work with reluctance, I’ll never find it! But first I have to wait until I’ve left the school and then face the future with courage!
After a couple of sad, gloomy days, lovely sunshine and a delightful day at last. Actually I shouldn’t write down all that foolishness, but it’s so good to completely unburden oneself now and again and at least the recollection is kept. If I find a pressed flower in a book, I always remember the sunny meadow where I picked it, or the spot in the woods where it was given to me. And it’s the same with this. When I’m old, perhaps, and I read this again, the memory of this lovely Whitsun day will do me good. Then in my mind’s eye I see our big, welcoming parlour, the windows are wide open, a couple are sitting on the balcony, it’s Net and Teun, of course, but soon Net sits at the piano and the melody of Beethoven’s wonderful song “Und ein liebend Herz erreicht was ein liebend herz erweckt” wafts through the room. And at the table, right in the corner, are two heads bent over one book, it’s La recherche de l’absolu by Balzac, and both heads have short dark hair, and – – E. reads aloud, a bit hastily and hurriedly and I do my best to listen properly and not think the whole time about how lovely I find it to be so close to him; now and then our fingers touch. He promises me that when we finish this: “after that heavy fare, you could well do with something light, Mon frère Yves by Loti.” If I could express the mood in colours, I’d say gold and rose pink. I had another morning chat this morning in Artis – and now waiting again for another Sunday. Oh hope, sweet hope. 
This Sunday is also a thing of the past and again I’m longing – always for more.– It was a lovely day. Marie’s engagement has been made public, there was a reception, the rooms were full of flowers and people, yet it was empty, very empty without Topsy – her portrait stood beside the flowers. There was something oppressive at the table. I duller than ever, but after the meal there was a wonderful interval; he carried me in his arms more or less upstairs and larked around, if I close my eyes, I can still feel his arms around me,– I hear his voice. Later on, in the Pavilion, he told me about the book he’s reading, and he promised me he’d let me read a chapter; when will that be? How nice it is of him, to always be thinking of me, I’m so grateful to him, so deeply grateful – and I can never do anything for him, and sometimes I’m so unpleasant, so sharp; if only he knew that I’d do anything for him, how I love him.
What’s happened during all this time? I’ve been to school every day, up to and including Friday. On the last morning the children gave me beautiful roses and a silver bracelet, and Marie Obreen gave me a book as well because I prepared her for her examination – and so that period is now behind me too. And Marie and Nette are out of town and I’ve often been to their mother’s to keep her company. On Wednesday I had dinner with her and spent a delightful evening. We sat on the balcony and E. played the violin and then he got me to read aloud from “Les deux amis” by Maupassant and we walked home together – wonderful. He was at our house on Friday evening and we read quotations in my exercise book together; I sat in the low chair right beside him. This morning in Artis he came and sat with us and we had such a wonderful talk – for three whole hours. I visited them for a short while this evening on the balcony – he’s reading Middlemarch – oh heavens, I wish the holidays were already over, what should I do? I can’t go on like this.
We’re going rowing on Tuesday evening.
He brought me a bouquet of roses, and we really enjoyed ourselves yesterday evening. We rowed together, and laughed and had fun and when we were on the way back, when it was very quiet and almost dark on the water, we sat very close to each other and held hands, yes I believe I almost lay in his arms; it was so mysterious, enchanting on the water, the lights of the city in the distance were reflected in the water; I imagined that we were floating in a gondola on the canals of Venice. It was a wonderful evening. This evening we’re going to Artis; it can’t possibly be as enjoyable as yesterday evening.
That Wednesday evening wasn’t all that enjoyable, we walked around together for a while, that’s all. Thursday was a day full of domestic chores – shrimps and peas.– Friday was a day full of emotions. At two o’clock in the afternoon the doorbell rang: it was Van Gogh from Paris. I was pleased that he had come, I saw myself talking to him about art and literature. I received him very amicably – and then he suddenly started to make me a declaration. It would sound improbable in a novel – yet it really happened; after being in my company for days at most, he wants to spend his whole life with me, he wants to put all his happiness in my hands. How can it be? And I’m desperately sorry that I had to cause him distress. For the whole year he’s been longing to come here, and he had high hopes, and now this is how it ends. He’ll return to Paris in such a sad mood. But after all I couldn’t say “Yes” to something like that. What he conjured up for me was the ideal that I’ve always dreamed of; a rich life full of variety, full of food for the mind, a circle of people around us who wish us well, who want to do something in the world, my vague searching and longing changed into an obligation that’s ready and waiting for me: to make him happy! Oh, if only I could, why does my heart feel nothing for him! And when he asked me if I was free, or if I loved someone else, what could I, what should I have replied? Free, yes, that I am, completely and utterly; do I love somebody else? I’m afraid I do, but will it last? Which of them would make me happiest, which of them would I make happiest? Oh, why is it so difficult to know your own heart? And I find the idea that I had to cause him sorrow so terrible; there’s truly sadness enough in the world, why must I add to it? Yesterday I forgot about it for a while because it was a gorgeous day; the walk from Breukelen to Loenen, glorious, merry, entertaining, we danced and messed around and laughed – but best of all was the rowing. Shall we ever forget it?
We set out to find boats, by chance E. and I fell behind, by chance I saw a small rowing boat near a barn. E. asked about it, the skipper let us have it, and while the other boys further ahead were haggling and going to impossible lengths to get hold of a boat, we rowed smartly past them. They were hopping mad, the others!
It was so lovely on the Vecht; that magnificent, broad river, glistening in the golden sunlight, with the tower of Loenen looking out over the green trees and shrubs on the one side, and a background of dark trees on the other. There were yellow and white water lilies with their broad leaves by the banks and, dominating everything, that peaceful Sunday tranquillity. I shan’t forget that in a hurry!
I’m sitting at the open window of Anne’s studio, in front of me are the dunes, and behind them the dome of the Kurhaus, behind that – the sea, the wonderful always murmuring sea. I’ve been here for a week but I haven’t been able to write anything yet. Today, however, Anne has gone to Amsterdam and before I go to the beach with Anne v.d. Kop, I want to just jot down my impression of the past few days. I maintain that staying with friends or relatives is not pleasant, for I always miss my freedom somewhat, but on the other hand a change of surroundings and diversions is useful. My foolish, wild sense of longing has subsided greatly, thank God, and it’s already a week since I saw him, and yet I’m calm. On the first evening I had a long confidential conversation with Anne about what’s closest to our hearts; we were sitting in the twilight at the open windows in her studio, the lights of Scheveningen shimmered mysteriously in the distance and we sat, hand in hand, and told each other our most precious secret. What will become of us both?
Yesterday evening we were at Gabriël’s. His wife, a good-natured, fat, friendly Belgian, opened the door herself and asked with real feminine pride if I would like to see the studio. We went upstairs but oh heavens, it was awkward, because what could I, a poor lay person, say about all those studies and drawings, and I couldn’t just stand there and say nothing – and Anne left me in the lurch. The studio itself didn’t appeal to me; there was a large canvas on an easel which he’d been working on that very day. He was standing in front of it contemplating, the little man with his piercing brown eyes, his red goatee beard and brown velvet beret; with a pipe in his mouth he paced up and down in front of it. “What do you think about those chickens, Anne, aren’t they a bit on the large side? You see, that’s a cock. I think the shade of the apple tree is all right, don’t you, my dear?” That’s how he talked and his loving wife agreed wholeheartedly and warmly with everything he said. There’s great harmony between the two of them, that’s apparent. Then he went and sat in an armchair in a corner, we all found somewhere to sit and while the last of the evening daylight came through the only window and illuminated us, he told us with half-closed eyes of a walk in the early morning that he once took, years ago. “You see,” he said slowly, “everything was surrounded by mist (all Gabriël’s pictures have something hazy about them), all you could see of the cows in the pasture was their heads and backs, I remember seeing a cow, a red one, you know, there, in that red there was a golden red” – he began to daydream and his eyes sparkled as if he could still see that beautiful colour, “and around there, you see,” – and he pointed it out to us – “irises grew there – their leaves stood out beautifully against that misty backdrop. I passionately wanted to remember it, to see it again in front of me; what a wonderful painting it would make.”
Poor artists, how you must always be tormented by that despairing attempt to reproduce what you’ve seen, so beautiful, so perfect and by what alas ends up so imperfectly on the canvas. I’ve no artistic aptitude whatsoever, but still I understand that everlasting torture, compensated for only by a few moments of pure, dominant pleasure.
Afterwards we had tea, and then went for a walk through the Boschjes searching for the moon that our host had to study one more time because he had to paint it. It was divine in the Boschjes.
I’m back in Amsterdam. I suddenly got such a longing that I couldn’t stay any longer. It was very stupid of me; for the air did me a lot of good but I couldn’t help it. I must just describe the last day; it was so sunny, so cheerful and pleasant. We went to Voorschoten with Marie and Lotte Croiset, to their farm; it was in the middle of nowhere, really rural, we rowed and picked waterlilies, we ate cream and tasted all kinds of country delights. I want to be a countrywoman.
Sunday morning in Artis was a big disappointment, I didn’t see him until the afternoon and then for only a moment – he does nothing but work hard, and I’m nothing but lazy – that’s the difference. I should have stayed away a little bit longer, how stupid, how stupid of me! I don’t know what to do with myself. And Anne is cross because I left so suddenly on Saturday – and I shouldn’t have told her everything! Oh heavens, what a mess I am in!
We’ve been to Cleves! It was a short trip – only days and it was not the trip through Belgium I’d envisaged – but it was still enjoyable, pleasant. There were four of us. Henri, Mien, I. ten S. and me. First we spent a day in Nijmegen, where we enjoyed the beautiful view of the Waal. We also saw the Valkhof, or rather the chapel which is all that remains of it; it was a strange feeling, when I stood on the spot where years before Charlemagne had attended divine service, stone and iron remain, and the people who built it turned into dust long ago – so what is a human life? We philosophized about it a lot on the journey. The following morning, after we’d seen the town hall too, with its beautiful tapestries, we went to Cleves. We drove in an open landau like lords and ladies to Hotel Robbers, which is in a wonderful spot, at the foot of the hills and close to the Memorial. How nice it was in the morning to sit together having breakfast in the open air, and late in the evening when the lightning kept on we sat and chatted for ages in front of the house.
We went on a splendid tour in the afternoon, to Moyland Castle. First we had a delightful drive through the woods, then we looked round the castle, which is full of all sorts of treasures, mosaic from Pompeii, a chair for Frederick the Great and one that Voltaire sat in, more beautiful tapestries, paintings, including a Creuze, and what I enjoyed most of all: the spectacular view from the castle windows. I’d like to be the wife of that baron. That might sound rather rash, but I saw him in person and he looks very friendly, a real gentleman; it’s certainly true that some people here are a lot better off than others.
On Sunday morning we walked to Kleverberg and then to Hotel Maywald; we sat on the terrace for a while and then rowed for an hour on the water past the Schwanenthurm, divine! We had dinner at the table d’hôte; I thought it was very companionable, all the hustle and bustle. Lively, but if you look down those long tables how few nice people you see among the diners. They sit there with long faces as though they don’t enjoy it at all; how can it be? It rained a little while we were sitting at the table, but when we drove away in our open landau it was dry, we went into the Reichswald, oh how indescribably beautiful it was. It was as if a transparent green veil had been suspended between the trees, for the trunks were completely covered with beautiful ferns, the pine trees smelled stronger than ever after the rain, and now and then we saw a pair of timid deer running away. A silence reigned so deep that we unconsciously fell under its spell – it was so solemn, so sublimely beautiful – I shall never forget it. But now my wanderlust has been kindled, I’m unsettled – if only I could just go somewhere – or do I have to be patient until next year?
Miserable weather, a grey sky and continual fine drizzle. This morning I played quatre mains for hours with Mien Weissman and now I’ve come upstairs, supposedly to work, but all I’m doing is stare vacantly and dream: oh, oh .... my peace has gone, my heart is heavy! Yesterday morning I went to Artis with the children, and in the afternoon we had a lot of visitors, including E.; he talked about his trip very entertainingly and stayed longer than usual – but when there are so many other people, I don’t like it.– He is very much in favour of my doing that miserable examination – if only I could, I’m really firmly resolved but if I haven’t spoken to him for a long time all my enthusiasm flags. His must be very soon now – of course he’ll pass – he certainly won’t tell anyone when it will be, and I can well understand that. I shan’t see him at all either; this horrible winter – no Artis, no rowing, no walks, nothing.
Mood dull grey.
Mood dull grey! No, if I were Netscher or Van Deyssel I would have named some other shade of grey, because although it’s misty and dark outside and I’m sitting here alone in my room at Tolsteegsingel and although I feel a little anxious and lonely, all the same my mood is very different from the last time I wrote in this diary. I now have work again, thank God, and that was what I missed most. I’ve had a desperately dismal time; a failed examination, poor health, an empty, dissatisfied feeling, a bad relationship with Marie, all kinds of things. Then, at the beginning of December, there was a ray of light. A substitute schoolmistress was needed in Utrecht, I applied and was taken on – and now I will soon start in my post at o’clock. And every week I’ll go home, otherwise I believe I wouldn’t be able to stand it if I didn’t see him for a long time. He’s been so kind to me, so kind these last few days. Sunday was a gorgeous day. I paid a visit in the afternoon and then he walked me home, all that way, to ask if I might go to the theatre with him that evening. We had a lovely chat as we walked along, he gave me so much courage, he’s so strong and reliable. Then he came to collect me in the evening, we saw a really charming piece, and then he brought me home again and stayed with us for supper. I think I’ll have to make do with that wonderful day for a long time.
Every hour the carillon in the tower opposite plays the aria from Martha: Ach so fromm, ach so traut, and it’s amazing how much emotion that old tower can impart; it sounds so gloomy, so sad, particularly at night, as if the notes don’t really want to come out. Now – only one night and then I’ll go home and I can spend lovely nights at home again. What a wonderful, thankful feeling it is still to have a home; I’m so fortunate, actually much too fortunate. Oh, that wonderful idea of going home tomorrow!
But now something about my acquaintances here. I don’t really understand my landlady very well yet; she’s extremely friendly to me, is very cultured, has read widely, but – anyway that certain something I don’t like in her is something most people who have had to find their own way in life have – always out for their own advantage. Harry is a very pretty girl with velvet eyes, quite languishing, with a rather undecided character; she’s engaged to Dr Nieuwstraten, who also lives in this house; Collette, the younger daughter, is ugly but much more lively than Harry; she’s probably afraid she won’t get married, and works at the telegraph office. Behold my new acquaintances, save for Johan, a nice lad of about . I do believe I’m well off here; sometimes we play whist in the evening but still I usually prefer to stay in my room. Next week I’ll get settled in completely at my leisure and then I’ll write every evening – the correspondence will have to compensate for what I’m missing. I’ve felt terribly alone, particularly during those first few days; everything was strange and unpleasant and on top of that there was a dense, grey fog, which was all I saw. On Tuesday afternoon, when I walked back to the house from school along the canals, alone under the dripping trees, I couldn’t see my hand in front of my face – then on my own I began to cry a little as I walked along. But this morning the sun shone brightly and it looked so beautiful here, with that clear, wide expanse of water on which swans swim to and fro, those beautiful trees, that wonderful sky; once spring comes it will be glorious. The school itself is very spacious and well built. It’s quite pleasant in the staff room, most of the teachers are much, much older than me, I feel like a schoolgirl among them. One is still young, Joukje Wartena, who teaches natural history, she’s but looks much younger, also lives in Amsterdam and seems quite sociable. Miss Nicolaï was very nice to me, too; I’ve hardly seen anything of Miss Buddingh. I doubt whether I’ll teach well; it’s so awkward with so few books. This time tomorrow evening I’ll be quietly at home. Wonderful!– –
I’ve already been home twice, how that time flies. I’m beginning to get used to everything now, and a lovely day like yesterday gives one courage! When I’m on the train on Saturday afternoon I’m so impatient I can barely sit still, yet when I’ve seen and spoken to them all again I feel rather strange, out of my sphere, blown over from somewhere else! Everything’s all right again by dinnertime, and I find it all normal again. On Sunday morning I begin to wonder when I’ll see him. I went round to see them yesterday after coffee, we admired the beautiful Bouwmeester pictures then we talked for a while (he went out) and afterwards I stayed with them to eat so that in the evening we could go and see L’abbé Constantin. After dinner we went downstairs together for a moment, to his room, to look for a book and we had a nice chat, then in the theatre, then he brought me home – he’s so good to me, so good! Poor boy, he was so dispirited, is there anything I can do for him now? I’ll try to write to him!
The days are passing quickly and monotonously. I’m not yet as I should be because I spend my evenings in a melancholy way; things will get better once the cold weather is over. This week I was not in as good a mood as last week, but I didn’t have such an enjoyable Sunday to look back on. He paid us a visit in the afternoon and as I was showing him out we talked briefly about my letter. Why doesn’t he answer it, why? I wait and wait.– It’s good that the school provides so much distraction, at least there I can’t think about it.
He’s told me himself why he hasn’t written – the explanation was not very satisfactory, but after all I can’t be angry with him however much I wanted to be – I’m already longing for Sunday again. Otherwise I’m in a sad state these days, last week I had toothache and now I’ve got stomach ache again; I spent the whole afternoon in bed instead of my normal visit to Breg, feeling so mournful, and just when I was lying down and crying a bit after dinner, Breg came to see me – it was lovely, when she sat and talked for a while – distraction is what matters I’ve just received a letter from Mien, how I’m longing for home and for everyone, how lovely and friendly everything seems there – how could I ever be dissatisfied if I were there.
I’m sitting really cosy and relaxed by my little fireplace in an easy chair, my workbox and books around me, and for the first time in ages I feel quite comfortable in my room. I also have another pleasant Sunday to look back on, that birthday yesterday was wonderful. The matter of the letter has been properly resolved, he was so sweet and affectionate to me, I’ll write to him soon in reply to his letter because he wrote to me after all, although his letter was as cold as a block of stone and unfriendly, oh E., you’re such a wonderful mixture of tender sensitivity and harshness.
But I also have to write about something else. Unfortunately it’s time to apply, I’m afraid, I’m afraid that I won’t get the post – I would regret it because of the honour and the money, but if I get it I’ll have to go to England during the summer holidays, what a drawback, yet I’ll do it. Anyway I’ll have to wait, it would be absolutely wonderful if I got it, so I’ll just calmly accept the result. A fatiguing time is imminent, I have to go to The Hague, write and pay visits, bah how tiresome!
Dries and Annie’s wedding has been set for the end of April. Dries wrote that Van Gogh is now utterly and completely enveloped in the bohemian circle of young painters; do I have that on my conscience now, that he’s ruining his health and living his life such that he’s bound to regret it later? If only I knew whether I did the right thing! 
I’ve received another letter from him in answer to my letter, again seemingly cold and indifferent, but– he means it very differently, he’s so sensible and reliable – his only shortcoming is that he gives so little of himself – but still I’ve got to know him much better now.
I did some work this evening for the first time in ages, thank God, because I’ve frittered away my days for ages!
Yesterday was a day of such sad memories! I stood by her grave, now covered by a thick blanket of snow, and asked myself: is it possible that we’ve already lived for a year without her? O Topsy, dearest, why were you taken away so early, it’s so hard, so unfair. And everything just carries on as normal. I was with them yesterday afternoon: Jan, Marie and E., we sat and talked about all sorts of ordinary things; we didn’t want to make one another sad, but nevertheless she was in everyone’s thoughts.
My poor boy, he looked so pale and worn out, we talked together for a moment as he was showing me out; our correspondence has been of some use; we understand one another much better. Is he going to write again? He promised me he would.
It’s Friday evening once more – I go home again tomorrow! It was a doleful, anxious week – my poor boy, so ill – thank God he’s a little better – but I shan’t be able to see him tomorrow. What a melancholy day that was last week – and I had so looked forward to it! I have to keep saying to myself courage, courage! It’s a difficult time.
Thank God I saw him for a moment yesterday, he had become pale and thin, and his eyes were twice as big as usual – my poor boy. It’s his birthday tomorrow – how well I remember this day last year.–
It says “Lieblicher Frühling, du nahst” on my calendar – and outside the snow is lying a foot deep, and it seems as though we’re in the middle of December. Will spring ever come! And E. is still ill – I saw him for a short while on Saturday evening, as pale and thin as last week.– And when they’re all standing around like that, I dare not say anything, and I’d so like to cheer him up a little – my poor boy. Annie’s come back – I’ll write to Dries tomorrow, this week I don’t want to be so hopelessly down and dispirited as I was last week! Willpower!
I went to A. on Wednesday, I couldn’t wait any longer, and just as I arrived Coenen was having a consultation with Professor Wurfbain. Thank God the operation went well, and I just received a postcard from Lien saying “at least he’s not worse”. Cold comfort. Oh this anxiety. I’m going to A. again tomorrow, when will there be rest!
I saw him again yesterday for a while but it was as if I was under some sort of spell, when I was standing by his bed – I could say nothing – nothing – he must have thought: hey, how cold of Jo, surely he must know how often I think about him, always, always. Thank God for the Easter holidays on Thursday. I’m going to Scheveningen to stay with Anne until Saturday. She’s getting married this summer, so it will be the last time we’ll be able to have a quiet old-fashioned conversation. And then a whole week’s rest! Oh how I’m longing for it – I’m so tired, so worn out. Is it my fault I can’t get things out of my head, I fret and brood – I don’t do any work – it’s very wrong but what can I do? I must write to Dries but I’ll do it tomorrow morning, when my mind is clear.
I’ve had to give up, everything; had to leave my work undone, I didn’t go back to Utrecht again. I thought I was going to die: what a dreadful time I’ve had. When I arrived home for the Easter holidays I was dangerously ill, I don’t want to go into all that misery again; the arrival of Dries was a ray of light, which got me out of my apathy again for a brief period. He’s married, it was May, he was sweet and affectionate with me and now he’s gone, oh I hope and pray that he’ll be happy – how will things turn out? Annie’s cold, prosaic nature beside his warm short-tempered character, so susceptible to impressions, I can’t go into that, we’ll have to wait and see how it goes.
Well, I wanted to try to go to U. again and at the end of April, the day after the reception, I left but it didn’t work out; on Monday I was ill and miserable, Tuesday was even worse and on Wednesday I fled home in a panic. I couldn’t stand it, I was as thin and pale as a ghost, half wasted away. I couldn’t sacrifice my health utterly and completely. I tendered my resignation – shall I regret later? But I could not stand it any longer, I would have gone under. 
I’ve just been looking at my first diary. It started in , I wanted to cry and laugh, it was so childishly naive, so full of impulses to be good, to become something in the world. And now, when I look back after years, what’s become of it all? But I shouldn’t be so despondent, it must change, I can’t live like this, with nothing that excites me, nothing that occupies me. First I’ve got to get better and strong and then? again


“forward with life
prepare for strife”

as an old song says, which Anne always liked so much; I’ve now agreed an indefinite truce, but it mustn’t last too long.
Oh, the uncertainty, the waiting, the hoping and longing, doesn’t he notice anything, doesn’t he understand anything?
It’s the evening before Whitsun, how different this day was last year – then I enjoyed it so much – – now, nothing but fear, torment and sorrow. I can’t get it out of my mind, I hate and detest myself, I can’t go on like this. But what should I do? I’m not strong enough to work: for entire, long days I sit contemplating and staring vacantly, oh, my health won’t improve that way either. Sometimes I have moments of clarity but they’re very short, mostly I’m dull, indifferent to everything, the best thing would be to go away for a while, but where?
Nothing is more beneficial than a change of air and surroundings, here I can’t think about it so much and not long to see him so much – I feel better already. But at last I had another lovely hour with him again on Sunday evening – like old times we walked home arm in arm, so nice – so very companionable – at first, though, he was a bit cross about that unfortunate note, but he forgave me anyway.
What a strange feeling it is to be suddenly transported to completely different surroundings, among completely different people. When Jan Veth came on Monday evening, and he, Anne and his sister were talking about all sorts of things that for them are normal, I was utterly unable to join in. I felt so shy, so outside my sphere, he must think I’m impossibly boring. It seems to be a nice family, they have something fresh about them, something original, but that’s also certainly due to some extent to their financial independence. If one can do what one wants, one doesn’t worry about the normal routine of daily life – and then what diversion, what a life full of variety they have. There’s a happy destiny awaiting Anne, that’s certain, what a difference compared with Marie and Net. 
At the moment I have a fancy to walk in the dunes armed with my portable writing case one of these days and write calmly at my ease in the open air. First of all I want to get some practice, try to put down on paper an impression that nature makes on me, to analyze my sensation to a degree; I want – as Flaubert says – to get originality – if I don’t possess it. I prefer to walk in the Bosjes because the sea breeze on the beach makes me anxious; in the woods it’s warm, sunny, sheltered, a wonderful sensation of well-being settles on me and I breathe with pleasure the wonderful smell of the pines while with my eyes I enjoy the delightful shades of green, the young oak leaves, the brown beech trees whose leaves still look red, the darker pine trees, it’s enchantingly beautiful. I’m doing my best to get better as soon as possible; I find it so tiresome walking around half ill, looking old, poorly and thin. Clara isn’t strong either but she’s infinitely more cheerful than me – but then she hasn’t been through such a dreadful time as I have. I’ve talked to Anne but little; happiness makes people so selfish, she only thinks about herself and I can’t be candid – there’s always something that holds me back. But if happiness makes one selfish, so does grief. Oh, how I’ve only had time for myself recently, poor Mien has had her hands so full with me – but now it’s going to change. I’m beginning to regain some appetite for life.
Sunday morning! It’s blissfully quiet in the house, Anne and Clara have been in A. since Friday; I’m here with only Mrs Dirks and Sien; I’d prefer to sit by myself reading all the time – but unfortunately good manners say different. It’s a balmy, warm day, outside it’s already just as warm as it is indoors; the studio windows are wide open, and fresh, scent-laden air is blowing in. p. The flags on the Kurhaus are flapping, that’s the only sign of life, the whole of Scheveningen seems to be asleep, all I can see are closed green shutters.
Yesterday afternoon I went for a walk in the Haagsche Bos with Anne v.d. Kop, but I don’t like Anne very much, she never comes out squarely in favour of something and so cloaks the truth; her voice also has something small-minded about it, very good for explaining something to children, or telling you something: now listen, you’ve got to do this that way, and that like this, but I can’t believe she could ever speak like that with much true feeling. I’m dull this morning – I wish I could always have my book with me, because when I’m in the mood to write and have all sorts of things in my head – I can’t, and when I sit in front of my book, I know nothing. Then I’m like little Budge: “I have not many words inside of me, guess they’re all dropped out. 
I conceived a notion of writing on the beach – finally I was able to go on my own for once – armed with notebooks and his pencil I set forth – but yet again disillusioned. I’m in an unfortunate spot: nothing but deckchairs right in front of me, screaming children close by – but the worst thing of all is that I’m not in the mood.
Why is it that I’m so cheerful with some people yet e.g. now, here, I never know what to say. I’ll be glad when I leave here – normally I’m not so restless but I feel very out of my sphere. Let me try to analyze it. Anne and Clara talk about nothing but the young household, and that’s very nice for them, but I can’t possibly be absorbed by it for the whole week; for my part, on the other hand, I have nothing I can discuss with them and I’m simply not cut out for small talk at all. Cl. has a singular talent for being able to talk for half an hour about a trifle that happens to her, e.g. about a letter she receives.– E. would say: that’s only the outward appearance of being sociable, and it’s also because she hasn’t got any important things to think about. Adolfine arrived yesterday evening and came to see us this morning with the children; she’s become thin and brown, but otherwise hasn’t changed. I used to like her very much indeed and how unhappy I was when I didn’t see her. Yet everything passes: is it the same with every love?
Sometimes I’m homesick for A. but I want to suppress it as much as possible – I’ve only been away for a fortnight.
The sea murmurs and sparkles and sings, sometimes it sounds so indignant, like a loud protest against all those unpleasant people on the beach, some of them come down the steps from the Kurhaus, walk across the beach in a dead straight line, and then stand at the edge of the water with mouths open wide with amazement – I hate bourgeois people on the beach with a passion, outfits must be in harmony with the sea because it’s a tricky background to stand out against. We were also here for an afternoon with Jan, he sat dreaming and dozing in his chair, read some of Manette and then drew a couple of donkeys. I like him very much; I wish I knew him a little better.
The sea tires me.... I’d like to say, be still for a moment.
Back in A. again alas! I’ll try to get regular work and in so doing diversion, I can if I want to. I saw him and talked to him for a moment today. He was just cool, indifferent, thought I’d come back too early, if only I could’ve stayed with Mrs D.!
We went to Zandvoort yesterday evening – beautiful sunset on the beach, I’m homesick for the sea, for fresh air at least; how nice it was to lie down together in the dunes.
Here I am amidst the coal mines in the industrial district of Liège, seeking to restore my health, it makes me think of Zola’s Forgeron; he lived there for a year, and recovered his strength. Thank God I’m already feeling slightly better, much better, I’m thinking about something different again, I don’t feel so terribly weak and exhausted; I also have the desire to write again – I don’t have any more ink now alas, but tomorrow – – – a full account! – – – of Olga, Alida and Emmchen.
I’m here with Mien S., I’d prefer to be on my own, but actually it’s better like this, because now I can’t doze and dream. There isn’t much opportunity anyway. The house is full of people: one German deputy headmistress with sharp, brown eyes, a small full figure, very lively, as well as a Frenchwoman who’s cordial and thin and suffering, the godmother of little René, whom she adores, and also a couple of ugly, insignificant lodgers, and the three graceful daughters of the house. Emmchen, as everyone calls her, the oldest, is small, slim and blonde and sadly is lame in one foot although it’s not bad, the others are big, pretty, elegant, in a word delightful.
As far as the surroundings are concerned, I’ve not seen all that much of beauty; I don’t particularly like Liège, although the higher parts are nice, but the other parts are just like any other city, we’ve seen the palace of the former bishops of Liège, l’île de commerce, the boulevard, that’s all. The most delightful in my view is the River Meuse; we went to Liège in a steamboat and in the mornings we’ll often go for a walk along the Quai neuf, or sit on a couple of stones on the bank; I’m always glad when I see water, it’s so fresh and delightful; but I’d also really like to go further upstream, to La Roche, who knows what might happen.
The banks are very beautiful, high and covered in vegetation. At the foot of the hills lie all the small villages with factories: Ougré, Tilleur, Jemeppe etc. Smoke rises from all those chimneys, it’s lively and industrious everywhere, and past them flows the wide, silver ribbon – the Meuse, and above it the peaceful hills with their wheat fields and woods. We haven’t been on many excursions yet; they’ll come later. Leendert Janse is coming this evening, next week perhaps Kobus too, what will that bring?
Yesterday evening we went for a beautiful walk to La Ferme de Boncelles, it was the loveliest I’ve seen so far, we rested beside a small stream and later on in the woods too; it was delightfully fine weather and between and o’clock the lighting effects as the sun goes down are the most beautiful. The day before yesterday we walked from Petit Bourgogne to Liège and went to a concert in the Jardin d’acclimatation, it was actually just like ours in Artis, except in the evening the view of the Meuse was really beautiful.
It’s odd that I should have no talent whatsoever for conducting a general conversation, they’ll think I’m very quiet here, it doesn’t matter anyway, but in that respect I’m just like Anne, a conversation with two or three, very well, but I can’t take the lead, at least not here. I haven’t any great desire to write, either; it’s oppressively hot, as I’d expect in August, and I’m a little dull.
We’ve already been here for a fortnight. Let me begin by trying to remember what I’ve seen. Liège itself, when viewed in good weather with clear sunshine, is a cheerful, welcoming, pleasant city; the streets are not too crowded but still lively enough; all the houses have balconies, the shops have many colourful signs and lettering, many flags, a lot of cheerfulness. The city was built on both banks of the Meuse, which are connected by bridges: Le pont neuf, le pont des arches, le passerelle, and another one; a large part is built on the hills, and the steep streets and the vegetation that rises above the houses give the city a picturesque air. Yesterday we climbed up to the citadel, from where one has a magnificent view over the city and can see the precise place where the Ourthe flows into the Meuse; there’s a flight of steps to come back down, so we were worn out. The loveliest place I’ve seen so far is Esneux, where we went on Saturday. It’s on the Ourthe and partially built high up on the cliffs; an enchanting small, quiet village where I’d like to spend some time resting. We’ve also rowed on the Ourthe. One gets the best view when one climbs up the stone steps and arrives in the middle of the village by the church, where a bench has been placed under a couple of tall trees from where a superb view can be enjoyed.
On Sunday afternoon we went to a concert in the castle park performed by the Jemeppe brass bands; the music was very good and the park is beautiful, it was like a garden party in England; the colourful outfits amidst the greenery produced a delightful effect. There were visitors here in the evening and we played in the garden again; Mr and Mrs Peterson’s wedding anniversary was on Monday evening and visitors came from Liège; it’s constantly busy here.
And now about myself! Oh, I’ll let that subject lie. It’s good that I’m not alone much; I read old books because it’s no exertion for me, I’m doing everything to get stronger and healthier – I don’t want to be weak any more. Of the people here I think Olga is the kindest, and Wilhelmine Braun the most amusing; Alida is also very nice but more commonplace. I only receive letters from home; the ones from Mien are the nicest. Dries writes very lovingly, Annie the most unpleasantly, I still want to go ahead with Mien, but how? I must take care to keep my pen under control, for I spoil everything when I get angry. K. is here too, I’m doing the impossible to be cool and indifferent to him but it creates something very forced; I’ll be glad when he’s gone.
A real Saturday evening feeling – everything’s clean, everything’s tidy! I can pride myself on one thing that I’ve made progress in – neatness! I didn’t think about it before, but ever since it was brought to my attention I always bear it in mind.
The domesticity and quiet cosiness that reign here do me good; this evening in the twilight when the lady of the house and Emmchen were singing their sweet French love songs at the piano, I had the old feeling that I so often had in Elburg: that feeling of contentment, of quiet – oh, I wouldn’t want to say to a poet: Let me feel what I never felt before, but it is stupid and childish to want to return to what I felt before – I was much happier before, at the least I could go into raptures, I knew people less well, didn’t always fathom their motives, trusted more in everything and everyone! And now – no, don’t return after all, I am stronger than before; I can endure more and face grief. I should like to stay here, I’ll ask the lady of the house if she’d like me as a replacement for Olga and Alida; I could stand it here for a long time, it’d do me good! 
It was Olga’s birthday yesterday, Mohr, Prümmer and Fringer visited in the evening; I like the first of them best, if only he weren’t so weirdly tall and thin. Wilhelmine has left; it always did me good to talk to her, so energetic, strong, active and I, lazybones – when shall I start feeling stronger!
Yesterday we went to Tilff, it’s a sweet little village on the Ourthe, not so picturesque as Esneux, but the road to it goes through a wood and when one reaches its edge the village is a long way down in the valley and the view of it is enchanting. We were in the company of Mr Mohr again; he told us some stories from his youth, about trips through the Alps, about life in Vienna – he’s by far the most intelligent of everyone here. In the evening we had a lovely time rowing on the Ourthe in the moonlight – today, alas, I have to pay dearly for that exertion. Thus the days pass imperceptibly, yet doing nothing bores me and I can’t be content with crocheting silly bits of lace. I even read only superficially – am I really going backwards in everything? I received a long letter from Mien – she talked to him, even walked home with him, and she doesn’t say what he said? This time last year I was still cramming for that dreadful examination – if only I knew for sure what did me the most harm, thinking continually about one thing, or the work? But oh, what good is it after the event.–
Downpours alternating with sunshine, a clap of thunder now and again – I had wanted to go to Chaudfontaine! Our stay here is beginning to come to an end – I don’t believe that I’m very much better – but at least they haven’t had the bother of me at home all this time. I still have to get through the month of September – and then – it’ll be over once and for all!
Went to Cockerill today. The factory covers hectares and there are , workers; in the colliery we saw the bins descending at a speed of metres a minute. We saw how rails are made, a thick piece of red hot iron is pressed between two rollers, a smaller size each time, so that every time it’s pressed the piece gets thinner and longer, finally it looks like a long, fiery snake; then it goes into a machine where it’s cut to the required length and finally the pieces are put outside in the open air to cool down. The blast furnaces, where the ore is thrown in and comes out again as iron, may never go out and so they burn day and night; we also saw the making of Bessemer steel, which looked like a magnificent firework; the workshops where screws, nails etc. are made and also those where the smaller parts for locomotives etc. are made. It’s a huge hall with all kinds of equipment that is all set in motion by one machine, so even if the workman who should be there isn’t, the machine operates regardless. The steam hammers exert a force of to , kg. In that hall there was a deafening roaring and humming, poor men who have to spend their lives in smoke, ash and carbon monoxide; why all this inequality, why do those people struggle and labour so to earn their meagre wages, while the director and the other engineers live off them so calmly? It’s the privilege of intellectual development over manual labour, but still it seems unjust. My head still throbs when I think about it – what a contrast with our lovely peaceful rowing boat trip on the Meuse yesterday evening. I wrote to Mien this morning, I woke up early – when will I be able to sleep peacefully again, like before, always those dreams – it makes me so tired.
Yesterday morning I went to the church in Lize with Emmchen to hear Mr Moser preach – he’s completely and utterly like Cole, a handsome face, fine, serious brown eyes, a simple appearance, simple language and gestures, but how serious, what a holy conviction emanates from his whole demeanour. Everything that people say about him inspires interest in me; he’s a nobleman from a good family, he had to break off his engagement with a pretty rich girl because she didn’t want to follow him to Seraing; he now lives a lonely life in Lize and leads the life of an apostle utterly and completely, or rather a missionary among the rough miners’ community. This evening we heard him again at a meeting of the Temperance Society. It was in the school building, a classroom with white plastered walls, a crude wooden table on which an oil lamp was burning, also the school benches where every morning small children struggle to learn their alphabet and where now there sat men with their craggy faces, their coarse blue linen smocks, listening to the simple young man who told them about the dangers of yielding to passion and pointed out to them the ways to combat it. We were the only young ladies in that company, in which many a person would have said that we didn’t belong – oh no, we didn’t need to be warned about drunkenness – but – oh, giving in to other foolish, frivolous inclinations, the improper waste of valuable time, not doing so many things that we ought to have done – how heavily all that weighed on me and I thought: oh, it’s so much harder for the poor workman, who has so much that can excuse him if he surrenders to disastrous drinking, to cure himself of a deficiency than it is for us, who have so many resources to lead us back to the right path.
One of the delegates that evening openly confessed how he had previously surrendered to sin – and I, oh I must admit to myself with shame how badly, how foolishly, how sinfully I’ve been living recently, sacrificing everything, everything, my own happiness and that of all those around me solely so that I can surrender to that one unhappy thought that has all along possessed me – I’ve done nothing for others, I’ve been nothing to others, I’ve put everything down to my fragile health – alas, alas, how much I myself am to blame.
And now a small ray of light, a revival of what’s good, oh, let it bear fruit. Would he understand how he’s done me some good – let me remain strong, strong, when I’ve returned to A., too! Let me once again have a goal in mind, then life will have value for me again; can’t I do something for others, make others happy, even though I’m not happy myself?
On Friday we went to Chaudfontaine and Spa. Chaudfontaine is enchanting. We went for a short drive to the fountain of love; we also took a long drive around Spa. And saw the springs. Spa is busy, a real health resort, many fine clothes, great luxury, something like Scheveningen. Only a few more days and we’ll be back home, the only thing left is an outing to Dinant. This evening visitors are coming here again, I feel at home here now – will I ever come back here? Oh, these questions about the future.
This morning I attended Marietje van Guylik’s funeral – in the churchyard among all those people, with all those theatricals, that feigning of feelings, that display of grief, I felt nothing – nothing; it didn’t make me miserable, I felt only for him, for this walk to the grave must have reminded him so much of that difficult funeral procession to Zorgvlied – but now I’m sitting here so quietly this evening, I begin to understand for the first time what those poor parents must feel! I went home with Sam – I’d like to talk to him again.
The Nieuwe Gids is full of cries of indignation about the article on Multatuli by Dr Swart Abrahamsz; he knocked our former idol off his pedestal, and treated him as an ordinary neurotic. The young people rightly respond: why is it, then, that not all neurotics, that not all sufferers from neurasthenia, can write as he does, if that’s the only thing he should be reproached for. 
Lack of willpower, or rather weakness of will, an uneven and unself-controlled working of the will – oh yes, most people suffer from that nowadays – and alas, alas, it is our malady, too. Henri has it to a high degree, for Dries it is the bane of his life and I – has it not been my malady too, in the last two years? Developing willpower and at the same time trying to recover my health, these two things are hard for me to combine, alas, my will also works unevenly, and when I want to wrench myself away from that feeling of weakness, of exhaustion that comes over me and stays, then it’s one huge effort, which is followed in turn by all the greater listlessness. The hardest thing is knowing the right limit, how far you can go. Could it be true that someone who is physically and intellectually in balance can never be a genius? But what about Goethe then?–
How I’m roaming about these days – I, who used never to leave A. The quiet here does me good; I had to run away again. Yesterday we walked to Leiderdorp, it reminded me vividly of the Zwolscheweg in Elburg, the same vistas, the same wonderful calm, but without that invigorating sea air. We’ve also been to Katwijk for an afternoon, and I sat on the beach, dreaming, for two hours. There has been a change in me – I don’t know what – I’m going home for my birthday – perhaps I’ll come back again afterwards; I’m pinning all my hopes on that birthday – then I want to forget, forget everything, everything that has caused me to suffer so terribly these last two years.
My premonition was right – it’s over, all over – oh, to stay strong now. I will not let him destroy the rest of my life, he’s done it for three years now – I’ve devoted every minute to himI’ve wilfully spurned my own happiness and now it’s enough. If I can’t be happy again, I will at least stay strong. Is he so much to blame? I don’t know what’s true and what’s untrue any more; one moment I want to hate him, yes, kill him for all the untold suffering he’s caused me; then I call him a coward, a dissembler, who toyed with me for three whole years – and then again I think: oh, it’s my own fault, I mustn’t blame him. Would Mien have sent that letter? In God’s name I have to trust her in this, her sense of honour and justice. My poor sweet Mien, oh that’s the worst of all – that I have caused her so much sorrow, too – all those years I let him spoil, how I must hurry if I want to make up for them. I must make a decision, I must act, something else must come in its place; I’ve always condemned Mien because she yielded to it for so long, I will not do that. And I can’t expect help from anyone, oh I must help myself, I must fight it and realize that life is not happiness, but a hard fought battle. Oh, I fought so hard this last while, but not hard enough; not enough. It must get better now; if only I was in rather livelier surroundings, it’s so quiet here, but at least I’m not a nuisance to them at home. What will Dries write? Oh, I’ve neglected him, too, this last while!
I must now live one day at a time – write letters tomorrow morning, oh, always dissembling, always play-acting – what is life after all? But I’ve acted so wrongly, expected so much that was impossible, lived the truth so little, always in seventh heaven, that’s no good. I must go and study something, but what? I shall ask Anne Croiset, and above all I must control myself and not talk to anyone about it – that above all.
The evenings are the worst – sometimes I feel as if I’ll burst – for I just have to keep everything bottled up, not talk to anyone about what’s closest to my heart. Sometimes I’m so despondent that I think: I’ll die of longing for him, I can’t do without him, I’ve been with him for three years – I don’t have the strength to bear it. And yet I may not be despondent, there’s still so much I must live for – if only I could put it behind me first, it’s much too quiet here and too little distraction – I think about it all the time. I got a letter from Dries – so hard, so terribly hard. He may mean well, perhaps, but he can’t understand what love is; he’s never loved anyone; oh my boy, my dearest, why couldn’t you love me a little – that dear, dark head, how often have I clasped it in my thoughts and whispered to him – I love you, love you as much as no one on earth had ever loved before. I know I mustn’t think about it, I must live like a machine, always dissembling, always saying something different from what I mean, but how can I always do that? In the evenings we pla cards, sometimes I play the piano, but it’s all as if I’m not there – I’m not living – I don’t know what’s happening to me. It will get better, won’t it? – it must – I shall start working for an examination, for secondary school Dutch perhaps. Oh, if only Dries could find me a post in Paris – I must have a change.–
Another day over – the silence and solitude here are becoming almost unbearable – I’m much too much alone with my thoughts. Another letter from Mien this morning, she’s so kind to me! I haven’t replied to Dries yet and I haven’t even written to Annie; I can barely bring myself to. I would like to fly home at once, but will I be able to bear it in A., always around and near them, always hearing them talking about him – it might be better in a completely different setting, I would heal sooner there. The sense of injustice is what most distresses me, we must – rise above – injustice done to us – yes, but that isn’t easy. I should so like to tell them all the truth to their faces, tell him what he has been: a coward – a dissembler who never, never treated me fairly – oh, if only I could. And I should like to tell the world too. Everyone should know, I’d like to brand him – he who placed himself above everyone else, and who is so far, far beneath them.– It is precisely this contempt for him that is the only thing that can heal me, but then this absurd idea of vengeance wells up in me, then I wish that he felt what he’d done wrong.
But I mustn’t think about it; I must force my thoughts into a different channel. How will the lessons with Annie Coomans go? I shall do my best for her soon. Start learning something myself again – my old desire to write is surfacing again. Oh, perhaps later I shall look back on this whole period and say: how foolish I’ve been to make myself so unhappy about it! But I can never again become the same as I was before – never again!
Yesterday I went for a walk with Jo Kuyper – it was a glorious autumn day, the atmosphere fresh and invigorating, the shades of green inexpressibly beautiful. I was able to have a wonderful talk with her. Without telling her what had distressed me, I was still able to speak out more freely than with Cor and Marie. The glorious weather, these beautiful autumn days are all that are keeping me on my feet, I have to go out to walk. I’m frightened of going back to A., and yet I long for home. I should move straight away to another environment, but that’s not possible.
I do my best to think about other things – this morning I went to the Lakenhal, with all sorts of mementoes of the Siege of Leiden, old paintings etc., I liked the building itself best. Leiden is a fine, tidy city – one sees no one in the streets but the people must all sit at home working – there is so much erudition here, I take every venerable greybeard to be a professor, and every thin young man to be his assistant; the students themselves all walk around in long light grey or light brown coats and are most occupied with not studying.
I had a letter from Mien this morning – oh, if only I knew whether it is true that I still have to keep so quiet under this injustice – I sometimes want to scream aloud in pain – why, why cover everything up, dissemble in everything – oh, if only I could just forget it, could wipe out the last three years.
Back in Amsterdam – Sunday evening. Beb is singing and I can hear her song upstairs in my room – Ihr, die ihr Triebe des herzen kennt – I don’t want to think, to feel anything – only I want to discuss as best I can whether I should go to Paris – whether or not.
 I have a permanent post here at guilders with a few other lessons – I would have to give that up to face an uncertain future in Paris – but on the other hand I can begin a new life there – new impressions. Dries and Annie will perhaps help me – I want to be myself again – I shall learn, oh, I shall do my very best to make up for everything I’ve lost, all that lost time! How long I dreamed – it was a lovely, a wonderful dream, but only a dream, and oh, the awakening is so bitter.
On Thursday morning I go to Paris! I have to; here I can’t tear myself away from all those thousands of memories that cling to everything, I’m still living as if in a distressing dream, that can’t go on.
I have nothing to say about the last few days – always that gnawing pain, that bitter “why, why did he do it to me”.
Last Tuesday I had to go to S. Marie reproached me for my lack of intimacy, friendship – perhaps she’s right – then their mother came in. There was something in the way she greeted me and kissed me as if she wanted to make up for something – I immediately understood that she knew everything – she took me upstairs – put her arms around me and said: “oh, my dear, I shouldn’t really say this but I do know what you’re going through – he behaved badly to you – he’s my own son – but I have to say it – he has disappointed me so much, he is so weak, he wasn’t worth it.” I can’t remember everything she said, we wept together – she for the child she had lost – I for my lost happiness, my ideals that were so bitterly dashed.
It’s all nothing but a dream!– 
It’s all nothing but a dream! What lies behind me – my short, blissful marital happiness – that, too, has been a dream! For a year and a half I was the happiest woman on earth; it was a long, beautiful, wonderful dream, the most beautiful one can dream. And following it was all that untold suffering that I cannot touch upon – I lost him, my dear, faithful husband – who made my life so rich, so full, who awakened everything that was good in me, who not only loved me but who understood what I was lacking and wanted to teach me. I had yearned for it all my life and in him I found it.– “I would rather be perfectly happy for one year than have to spread it over a whole lifetime,” I used to say as a very young girl. My wish was granted – I have had my happiness, now duty remains. The duty to live and to care for my darling little boy, our wonderful child, our dear little Vincent.– “Wouldn’t you like to have a baby, my baby?” Theo whispered to me that first blissful wedding night – but I didn’t know then what it meant and I was so amazed and overjoyed at the happiness of being his wife that I didn’t yet count on being a mother at all. But he knew, and the child he gave me, his image with his blue eyes and his friendly features, his gentle, tender nature, his rich talents, his child is now my treasure, my comfort, my support, my all, to whom I cling and who gives me the courage to go on living.
And so I’ve started writing my diary again – not for the sentimental outpourings I wrote down as a young girl – (what a lot of nonsense I often proclaimed) – but for a moment of self-analysis and self-examination now and then, to keep a better watch on myself and develop a little, if possible. I must use all my strength to learn again so that I may be of some use to my boy later and he will not look down on his mother with contempt – as so many boys, and rightly, have to do alas. Will I ever be able to be a support and help to him? I can do no more than my best. I’ve come to live here, in Bussum, to give him healthy fresh air; I’ve started a boarding house to earn a living for both of us – now I have to make sure that all the domestic worries don’t reduce me to a household machine, but I have to keep my mind alert. That’s why I want to write down here from time to time things that occur to me about what I’ve read or about the people I meet or receive. Living here, I’m in close contact with Anna and Jan Veth again, their house is the “centre of culture” for me; it’s where many of the people connected with De Nieuwe Gids meet, from where the light must shine. Martha v. Eeden promised me as many books as I want – that’s a great many – in the past I so often suffered from book starvation of the mind, just as bad as actual starvation – I don’t have to fear that now.
I’m reading Utamaro by De Goncourt, the biography of one of the greatest Japanese painters, alongside Hokusai. Theo taught me a lot about art – no, let me say rather that he taught me a lot about life, I learnt everything through him: the greatest bliss – the greatest suffering, that teaches us to understand everything else! As well as the child, he has left me another task – Vincent’s work – getting it seen and appreciated as much as possible – keeping all the treasures that Theo and Vincent had collected intact for the child – that, too, is my work.
I’m not without purpose – but I do feel lonely and abandoned – all the same, there are moments of great serenity – that the satisfaction of my work gives me. If I may just maintain the health to work for our child – then my life will not have been devastated by the loss of my husband – but I shall always bless him and thankfully love him for all the happiness he once gave me.
I’ve been able to work again this evening – for the first time! The first six months I spent here, it was such an immense effort to learn the most ordinary domestic things that I could spare a thought for nothing else. I sometimes read something, but it was just a novel or the newspaper.– Now, at last, the household machine is pretty much in one piece and although it keeps me busy all the time during the day, it doesn’t occupy my thoughts so much any more and I can work in the evenings again. The life of G. Eliot by O. Browning was the first – I enjoyed it – although it’s badly written. But it put me back in touch with that great, courageous, intelligent woman whom I’ve loved and revered almost since childhood – remembering her is always an incentive to be better.
I long to go upstairs and see the child in his cot – my little angel.–
I have no method in the way I work – which means that I do so little in a day. My main work for the first few days must be to improve what I can in that regard. It’s true that one can never be certain of one’s time with a child, but I must do more in a day – I shall be old soon enough and then I won’t be able to read, won’t be able to work – how many things will be left that I never even knew anything about, that’s a sad thought. Sometimes I think: above all little Vincent must not learn a lot – but still I hope, from the bottom of my heart, that he will know a very, very great deal.
Two years ago we sat together with all the little baby things around us and were engrossed in what the child would be like. The child is here – but the father no more! He liked those little flannel vests the best, so soft and warm – I see him with them all the time.
Jules Destrée on the Primitives: 
“As concerns the name primitives, used to indicate the wonderful quattrocentists: if I adhere to that general nomenclature, once having given the usage a precise meaning, it is protesting against any notion of awkwardness or incompleteness whatsoever that might derive from that word, primitives. The name is indeed too clumsy and, to some, absurd to refer to all those painters who come between Cimabue and Leonardo. Happily, Müntz already responded by calling the fifteenth century the golden age. It takes all our modern illogicality to dare to describe as primitive such perfect artists as Ghirlandaio, as varied as Gozzoli, as subtle as Filippino Lippi, as intricate and delicate as Botticelli. Only the obtuseness of the academic tradition that has art start with Raphael could make such a stupid grouping possible. Whatever the culture of our brains may be, it would be rash to call our ideas superior in diversity, in delicacy and in depth to the ideas of those primitives.”
George Moore, Impressions & Opinions: 
“The lot of critics is to be remembered by what they failed to understand.”
The Human Comedy of Balzac offers a complete representation of the spectacle of civilised life. That sensation of endless extent and ceaseless agitation which is life, it (H.C.) produces exactly.
“It will be asked how Balzac could have written so much and yet found time to experience the life he was describing? The vulgar do not know, that the artist makes but little use of his empirical knowledge of life and that he relies almost entirely upon his inner consciousness of the truth.–
Balzac has called genius a terrible malady. The abnormal is found in all great writers, it must always be felt although it may rarely form the subject of picture of poem.
To create soul is to accomplish the wish of God.
Evil is but good, the results of which are not at once visible. If we do not always know where we are going – we always know the fatigues of the journey.”
The desire for truth is not enough in our troubled times, what is needed is a passion that exaggerates – but asserts itself. Zola.
To be strong, in the right sense, is not simply a matter of wanting and doing, for all the villains lie in wait; what is important is wanting and doing with talent, it is allowing the creation of justice and truth. Zola. 
There is only the written thought – the rest is nothing but vain agitation, nothing but visions that are borne away by the wind within the hour.– Zola. 
It is a year since he was laid to rest. On the anniversary of his death I visited the place where he lies – a ray of sunlight fell on the roses I had laid there – just such a rose as he gave me when we had been married for one day.– It was so quiet and peaceful there; I had wanted to stay and lie there beside him in the cold earth – I am so tired, so tired of all the worrying and thinking about everything, and the future weighs me down so! The wind howls around the house – I’m glad it’s stormy outside, just as it is here inside – but the child lies snug and warm and safe in his cot. Theo, my darling, my own dear husband, I shall take good care of him, look after him well – with all my powers – the thought of you helps me and will help me when my powers sometimes fall short. Oh, if only I could think that your spirit is with us – close to us. My darling, my darling – why did you leave us so early? We needed you so much and I loved you so much – you were making me a better person – what will become of me now!
A visit this afternoon: two painters, Verkade and Serusier – the latter a Parisian.– It was a pleasure to be able to speak French again. They think Vincent’s work is wonderful. Hearing that exclamation of admiration was something so unusual – here in Holland people are not so generous as far as Vincent’s work is concerned. It reminded me of those good times in Paris! Verkade is a young enthusiast – with something thoroughly Dutch and gentle – something that Theo must have had when he was that young.
The art appreciation session on Vincent’s drawings is in Arti tomorrow evening.– I have high hopes – I have a feeling of indescribable triumph when I think that it’s finally arrived – the appreciation – the liking – I must go to hear what people are saying – what their attitude is. The ones who used to ridicule Vincent and call him a fool. I also love talking to lots of people I know – everyone will be there – Martha and Van Eeden are coming – I don’t know about Jan and Anna yet – but I so hope Jan will go too. I won’t rest until he likes them too. I’m glad I finally got round to buying another notebook and continuing my diary. I’m experiencing and living through a lot – always feel a great need to express what’s going on inside me, but I’m often prevented by an excess of indifference. If I had described everything that’s happened to me this year in Bussum – it would certainly have been worth the trouble.
When I first arrived here, in May, the delight of the fruit trees in blossom – it was something like Vincent felt when he spent his first spring in Provence.– And seeing all our things from Paris again – oh, that first night when I slept in our bed again – I lay on the floor because the carpenter couldn’t find the screws and so couldn’t put the planks in – but it was as though the wooden frame around me radiated something of the warmth, the intimacy of the past – his blanket was over me again – I felt indescribable pleasure, almost as though I were with him again. I love every piece of our furniture, as though it’s something of him – the cabinet above all – his wonderful art cabinet with all those little drawers and cubby-holes where he kept his finest etchings and prints – I can’t open it without a sense of reverence! It was a pleasure for me to arrange everything as we used to have it in Paris; I couldn’t make it exactly the same, of course, but still in the same spirit. It took me months – the whole of the spring – hanging the paintings – I lived with him all that time. The Kerkhovens were already staying in the other wing of the house by then – but I didn’t have to do anything for them and it was a quiet time – alone with the child and my memories. I went for a lot of walks with the child – I remember the first flower he picked himself – and then, much later, the first time I walked across the little field with him – he couldn’t talk yet but he understood what I said to him all the same – and answered with all sorts of sweet noises and sounds, it was a lovely little walk.
Later on in the summer I was very busy – a family with five children to look after – and in between any number of other things – but working is the best diversion and I earned a lot of money. I sat quietly in my room in the evenings – open windows – the lamp with the pink shade – I wrote letters, always letters – I heard all the walkers passing by the house – everyone had company, talked and laughed – I was always alone, but not unhappy in my solitude – I had a great sense of serenity, of fulfilment – that everything was going well and my work was successful. Sometimes there were dark days – how I remember the anniversary of Vincent’s death – late in the evening I walked outside – it was already dark – it rained and the wind blew, I walked around and it was just as stormy inside as outside, I saw the lights in other people’s houses and I felt so dreadfully lonely and abandoned – how often must he have felt like that!
When I arrived home, Marie Kerkhoven called me in – I dropped exhausted into the easy chair that she drew up for me – there was light and warmth and cosiness – they sensed that I was grieving and were kind to me – that – is the best memory I have of them.
Mrs Ballot arrived in the autumn – I clearly recall the first time I saw her – dignified, composed, with modest manners and language – a typical, very respectable Hague lady – a fine, noble type – she had the most beautiful blue eyes I’ve ever seen. Slowly but surely that initial rigid reserve began to thaw and I discovered so many sweet and lovely things about her. The greatest modesty, a person who’s completely forgotten herself – friendliness – good judgement, very well read – she was the most delightful paying guest one could imagine. She made teatime a delight – a serious discussion developed as early as breakfast – between her and Lies, who was staying with me at the time. The two got on together very well!
Lies’s presence kept me constantly busy all winter – she spent the time before her marriage to Du Quesne staying with me. The dramas I went through with those two. First the children who opposed the marriage – that resistance was overcome – the family – then his poor health – with inexhaustible tact and patience Lies conquered all those difficulties and she’s now achieved her goal. And is she happy? I doubt it – the children have left – it’s empty and quiet and unfriendly in the big house without them – and he, will he find fulfilment in her to compensate for the absence of his children? He’s an odd character – without his dislike of company, and consequently thinking too much about himself, he could be an engaging, conversablem person – a pleasant member of society, as Pa would say, but now he talks too much about himself and his own petty interests.– Besides, there’s his mania about the Bourbon succession to the French throne. His sister married into the Bourbon family and Du Quesne has embraced the cause heart and soul, indeed he thinks of virtually nothing else – the last time I was there he immediately showed me all the books relating to it, it must be rather boring for Lies. 
They married on Dec. and when Lies had left I became more intimate with Mrs Ballot. Her health worsened continually – I sat up with her for one night – I shall never forget it. She was so patient and friendly! Yet she continued to go out all the time and maintained her cheerfulness and zest for life until one evening – I was sitting quietly writing in my room – she suddenly walked in looking deathly pale and anxious. Has your stove gone out? I asked, pretending not to notice anything, and I drew up an easy chair and made her comfortable.– She submitted with an abandonn that was unusual for her – fatigued, she laid her head on the chair back and then said – half laughing – oh such a sad laugh: “I was really frightened – I’ve brought up blood again – that’s a bad sign.” I saw the shadow of death pass across her face – I felt the icy cold of its nearness – all I could do was put my hand gently on her shoulders and stroke them.– I, caressing her!– She silently let me do it!
From then on she got worse and worse – it was close to Christmas – I’d got a little tree for the child that I still had to decorate. She came and sat with me in the evening again.– She needed more companionship around her – even though she couldn’t speak much, it tired her out. I brought the little tree into the room and began to put the stars and candles on it – oh with such sadness in my heart – because I was thinking of my darling – and how different it would have been if we’d been able to do that together for our little boy, and my eyes filled with tears as I decorated the tree – and she sat beside me in the chair, the dying woman, and looked wistfully at me – and with envy – because I was healthy and I had a child to live for – she had nothing left!
“It’s been a pleasure for me to see you busy like this – I would have liked to help, but I can’t any more,” she said, with one of her melancholy, friendly little laughs – when she stood up. She left after New Year – for a hospital where she lived on for a few more weeks. I was very sad when she died! I was busy all through January and February with the paintings: after endless correspondence – a visit from Isaäcson and a visit from Toorop – now, at last, there are paintings with Buffa in Amsterdam, with Oldenzeel in Rotterdam, in December there was an art appreciation session in Pulchri and now Thursday Febr. the one in Arti.
It was a delightful evening – everyone I wanted to see the works came – Breitner, Israëls, Witsen – Jan Veth – Jan Stricker and Kee Vos – Martha v. Eeden. It was packed, the people liked them. Wil came too, but there was little mutual understanding – that’s nothing – we don’t always see eye to eye. Now I’m going to start on the letters seriously and diligently, they have to be ready before the busy summer period starts. I’ve brought my diary more or less up to date, and will keep it up faithfully. Later on, the child should at least be able to form an opinion about his mother’s life – what she thought, felt and wanted. Her diaries and the letters from his father and his uncle – he’ll be able to use them to reconstruct their lives from the past. I have only one goal – to make him healthy and happy – in so far as I can – and oh, how little one can do! But for now I still can; it’s easy to make a child happy. He eats, sleeps and takes walks as regular as clockwork – his routine never changes – he gets cod liver oil and eggs – I give him everything I can to make him strong. I don’t spoil him because that would make him more unhappy than happy – I want to do everything to make it easy for him later on and for that it’s necessary for him to know what obedience is and never to whine to get his own way. I cured him of that as a very small child – now he’s always cheerful and content – he knows that he is allowed to do what he can do – but if I say no to something – because it wouldn’t be good for him – he doesn’t ask again.– He has the friendliest, most tender little heart one can imagine – if he has something good to eat, he says of his own accord: “Mama too”. He’s never happier than when there’s something he can do for me, an errand – or to pass something – he feels all the pleasure of being useful – he loves animals – flowers and everything that’s beautiful. His eye for paintings and prints is finely developed and he notices everything. His greatest delight is to scribble on paper with a pencil – he can do it for hours on end if I let him – and he’s only just ! It’s a real passion with him – his little cheeks become crimson, his eyes shine and his dear, sweet little hand, which holds the pencil perfectly, moves ceaselessly – to and fro.
He’s a beautiful child – a lovely, fair little pink body; his little legs and feet and shoulders are particularly lovely – and golden curls – a fine profile and his father’s blue eyes with their sweet, gentle expression that sometimes looks with keen inquiry, everything about him is gracious, his gait and movements and his voice is like a silver bell. He’s my solace and my treasure, my everything.
“Any mother of any worth has an unshakable conviction; it is that her child must be a hero: as a man of action or of science, no matter which. This small child is going to accomplish everything he sees is needed from his sorrowful experience of this world. The miseries of the past will be recompensed in advance by this splendid future: everything is miserable today – but he will improve it and all will be well. Oh poetry, oh hopeful expectation, where are the bounds of maternal thought?” Michelet. 
This morning I went to Wisselingh’s in Amsterdam – and enjoyed it. It’s like the small rooms in Theo’s gallery – Boulevard Montmartre – somewhat less distinguished, the surroundings – but there were splendid things. A small Corot, a mill on top of a green hill – a gorgeous Monticelli – trees in blossom – a splendid Neuhuys – a small child at a cradle, a still life by Vollon, with a cool and distinguished tone – a Michel – splendid – a sombre, fantastic Breitner – I hadn’t seen so many fine works all together in ages. I had a small thing by Vincent with me – but a very, very fine one – which I showed and now they want a couple of his works on commission. What a triumph! I’m so glad about it, it made me happy all day. When I got the train back to Bussum this afternoon with the child the sky was so divinely beautiful – time and again a golden sun appeared from behind the white, misty clouds – it seemed as if it was Theo’s countenance – delighted about the recognition for his brother! A letter from Toorop this evening that the exhibition in The Hague will be very soon – in the middle of this month – what a storm of emotions that’ll provoke.– We’ll have to summon up all our courage before then – and be strong in the face of the attackers – because there’ll certainly be many of them!
I also wanted to write about a visit to Martha the evening before last – and to Jan, where Wally Moes and Anna Vis were – but I’m too tired and prefer to go to sleep. I’ll write more tomorrow – the child has been as good and sweet as usual – who knows, wrote Theo to Vincent, ‘if my son may be someone’. 
Over the last few days I’ve spent every free moment I’ve had immersed in Vincent’s letters. I’ve been putting it off for too long – but now I intend to look on it as regular work that has to be done steadily, not with the passion of the early days because I used to work into the night and I can’t permit myself such excesses – my first duty is to remain alert and healthy in order to look after the child. I live utterly with Theo and Vincent in thought, oh, how infinitely fine and tender and loving that relationship was! How they felt for each other – how they understood each other! And oh, how moving Vincent’s dependence was sometimes – Theo never let him feel it – but he felt it himself sometimes and then his letters were distressing – I’ve often wept while reading them. My darling, my dear, dear Theo, with every word, between every line I think of you – during the short time we were together you really made me a part of yourself – I still live through and with you – may your spirit continue to inspire me – then things will go well, with our little one too.
Who’ll write that book about Vincent?
Some of Vincent’s paintings have been exhibited at Oldenzeel in Rotterdam – two articles by De Meester were published in the Rotterdamsche Courant, and a further enthusiastic one in a different newspaper. The fact that he’s becoming more and more well-known gives me indescribable satisfaction. On Wednesday I went with little Vincent to Leiden, where we had an enjoyable time together celebrating Wil’s birthday – and the following day I went to Rotterdam to talk to Oldenzeel myself for once and to see what it was like. He has a magnificent house – almost a marble palace, and the drawings were in one of the corridors – beautiful. The paintings were not hung very well – he had made some frames for them that looked very ugly – but he wants to exhibit again in the autumn and then it can look superb.
Over the last few weeks I’ve had all kinds of discussions with Jan Veth – I do my best to review our relationship ever since I first came here calmly and collectedly – and what is the outcome? When I came here with the paintings I was hoping that he would like them too and would help me – but he told me frankly that he didn’t see anything in them and so we hardly ever talked about them any more. But now, slowly but surely, more and more enthusiasts are appearing (I’m thinking about the visit from Verkade and Serusier), now there’s a stream, so to speak, one doesn’t know where it’s coming from, but it’s there and is continuing – now his eyes are beginning to open too, and he takes the trouble to look. But now, instead of openly admitting that he’s learnt to look at them – now he puts the blame on me – says I’ve prevented him from seeing – by always putting my opinion first and through that item in the newspaper and that article by Du Quesne – all small-minded reasons – and nothing in that whole assertion is actually true – because he told me himself at the outset that he didn’t like them. But to try to redress the balance, I think, he’s offered to help in publishing the letters – but as things stand now the relationship is most disagreeable – I find myself in such a false position in regard to him – he thinks all sorts of things about me – I about him – Anne doesn’t take sides but it’s no longer the pleasant, friendly relationship we had before. Perhaps some time will have to pass – I’ll be careful – not to make the misunderstandings even greater – so there is always something new to annoy me or make me sad.
The busy summer period is starting again, how will things turn out? Yet with all the thousands of worries it’s good that distraction is coming from outside again – now I have to achieve more of a balance – recently I’ve been living too much in my head. Oh, those wonderful long winter evenings – when I’d put the child to bed at o’clock and he lay warm and snug in his dear little white cot – (another day when he’s had everything he needs – I think every evening), I went downstairs to my cosy warm little nest – all those delightful, lovely things around me – the lamp with our old pink shade – oh, every object in front of me holds so many memories – then, so warm and happy in my corner by the stove, with a feeling of sensuality I brought out all my books and papers – I write letters – read d’Epinay, Michelet, De Goncourt again – Vincent’s letters – I lived through and thought through quite a lot during those long, lonely evenings – alone – always alone! It’s a period that’s coming to an end – Ma’s arrival will put an end to working for myself for a while and then it’ll be summer – but after that there’ll be long winter evenings again and they’re already smiling at me. If I were the nonentity that Jan thinks I am – I wouldn’t be able to endure the loneliness as I do. This evening I’m writing to Saar de Swart.– I no longer actually have anyone left who loves me – but I take an interest in her – and she lives in Paris!
For the first time I’ve written without that fever of excitement that normally compels me to write – what I’ve written also lacks my normal spirit.– Shall I ever learn to use my pen to write something original? Either I – or the child – one of us – it always stirs and swirls within me but when the tension of the moment is over, nothing comes of the most ordinary things either– and [the other[?]o things are usually high-flown.– It’s difficult – inspiration without exaggeration.
A beautiful, warm spring day today – in fact a summer day, if the trees were already green.– We’ve been in the garden together for the first time – little Vincent and I – it’s such a beautiful sight, to see that darling little fellow walking around and playing, last year walking was still so difficult and slow – now he runs around and climbs the hillock like a big boy. The air was so mild – the sun so refreshing – I sat basking and thought: how delightful Theo would have found it! This is the first time I’ve experienced spring – in the country – I have a feeling that something big is going to happen – something like when Anna gave birth. The trees are still so bare and poor – and in a few months they’ll be displaying their wealth of leaves.– What power is it that so imperceptibly brings about that miracle? What power is it that created my dear, sweet little boy?
A visit today from Freule De Court, who’s coming to board here for weeks – a little old lady with a threadbare velvet coat – but a friendly, wise face. I find it more troublesome than last year, taking in lodgers – but I must do my best not to find it too terrible – it’s for the little boy so I can give him the wonderful country air and the big friendly house. As time passes I’m getting fonder and fonder of Helma – at first I felt as though I’d been thrown down here – there wasn’t a corner anywhere that appealed to me, but now – the long winter evenings have bonded me so strongly to my cosy parlour with the beautiful Monticellis and Vincent’s flowers and fruit, and the portraits by Bernard and Guillaumin, everything appeals to me! And my bedroom with the child’s dear little cot – wherever that is, is good, of course.
I read Journal des Goncourt – - .– A princess who fled to Belgium during the siege said that she had moments – “when I had clenched my jaws so tightly because of everything that had happened to me that sometimes I could really barely speak”. That’s what I so often feel. Sometimes it’s as if my mouth will never open again.
Edmond himself says after the death of his brother: “I am in a state of extreme detachment from people and things. I’m no longer sure I love the people who are most sympathetic to me – as to things, they have lost their attraction for me.–” That last doesn’t apply to me – my books draw me more strongly than ever – I’m also more aware of things, but it is the case as far as people are concerned.
What, I wonder, is the difference between Anna V. and me? She has a very clear, simple view of things, she looks straight ahead but does not look through and through, there are feelings, fine nuances that she cannot sense and so there are moments when there’s something in me that doesn’t resonate with her. She considers herself to be much more practical, much more sensible than me – I think that she inherited more common sense from her parents and grandparents – she has more accurate insight into ordinary things – but there’s something blinkered in that soundness of judgement.– She doesn’t analyze her own inner life – she has a much easier life than me. And then, how much her husband has made of her – we women are largely what our husbands make us! 
I dare not make a start on Vincent’s letters – I still feel too overstrained.
Went for a walk to Galgensloot today. I’ve never seen nature looking so grim, so grey – so completely colourless as it is now. The tower of Naarden in the distance shrouded in a light grey mist – the fields barren – dark grey – here and there men were digging, so that the dark black soil came to the surface – black patches on the dull grey of the earth – those men in their grey, brownish, dingy, washed-out colours were as dull as their surroundings – the willows looked pathetic with their short arms sticking up into the air – the withered brown leaves are still on a few shrubs – but there’s no lustre or colour in them – everything was forlorn, tedious and sad – a few large black birds in the monotonous grey sky. It seems to me as if most Dutch artists paint at this time of year – then they’re right with their dull, drab colours, but I would rather choose a somewhat sunnier day. 
Miss v. Heel and her fiancé Thorwald Isaachsen came to see the paintings – I found him very sympathetic – there were tones in his voice that reminded me of Theo. “What happiness,” he said when he saw one of the trees in blossom, he sensed the beauty, because he has something poetic, something highly sensitive about him – he preaches to sailors – it would really have been something for Vincent. They’re getting married in May – “What happiness” awaits her – I can already see him in raptures beside a cradle with their child – without doubt he’ll grasp the poetry of married life. 
This morning, in the square in front the church, a farmer’s wife wearing a large, black coat, a white cap – holding a little girl’s hand – slowly, with great difficulty – each step resounding heavily – crossed the empty square – into the church, I read in her whole bearing and movement that she was weighed down with grief and went to the altar to find comfort there. I envied her! I didn’t know that a figure could express so much, I read what she was feeling – or was it that my eyes wanted to see this in her?
A letter from Toorop that he’ll still organize the exhibition of Vincent’s works – that at least is a weight off my mind. The paintings are on their way now – the ship is at sea.
These are lovely sunny spring days – the buds are swelling every day – my little bud, too – my little boy is growing and flourishing and thriving in this wonderful air. But his mother is sad and upset and oh, so lonely.
I don’t have the courage to start on Vincent’s letters again.
Jan was here yesterday morning and helped me select things for the exhibition – how will it turn out?
Rainy Sunday – made Gavarni’s acquaintance – through the book by De Goncourt – I really like to compare the lives of other artists with Vincent’s. Gavarni was often poor and wretched, too – and likewise developed his talent with difficulty and by working, he wasn’t born with it, and once in a while thought about suicide too. I only skimmed through the book, I’m going to go through it carefully and then look at the lithographs that I have again. Visited Anna briefly this morning – it’s a lovely, friendly interior with that pretty mother and the two healthy, sweet children. Jan has organized his life well – as Theo would say – because it’s his job to ensure everything goes well. He gave me the book and the Amsterdammer – which has a couple of lines about Vincent – an official announcement that his view of Vincent has changed – that he not only thinks him an interesting figure – but also accepts him as a painter. I’m very pleased about it. This evening the normal doctor’s visit by Fr. v. Eeden to Miss v.d. P., then a longer chat than normal with me. It was a rainy day and he was out of spirits and couldn’t work. That of course is nothing special – that will happen to everyone sooner or later.– He has such weakness about him sometimes – refined egoist too. He complained about his lack of freedom – that he had to work for his living – that he was busy with his patients during the day when he felt he could produce – and in the evenings often couldn’t. I wonder – if he were free to be able to write always – whether he would have so much that was special to tell the world then. There is a surprisingly petty vanity about him sometimes, which I can’t understand – this evening he talked about poverty – that he spent too much and yet could not cut down on expenses – they were all things that he needed: good butter, good coffee – a bathroom etc. etc.– People that didn’t feel that were insensitive – didn’t use their senses. I feel that the basis of his line of reasoning is unsound – one can just as easily make one’s life a “work of art”, as he says, without owning all those material things to perfection. For if that were the case, only someone in a marble palace with golden plates and silk and velvet clothes would be happy, and that is not the case, after all – one can refine one’s senses and in my opinion that’s not necessary as far as taste and smell are concerned! Theo used to give me gloves that cost francs, now I buy them here for stivers – oh that matters so little to me! How happy I still was for one moment at the beginning of Theo’s illness – that he’d get better and open a little shop like Tanguy, if need be, and how happy we would have been in a small back room behind the shop – the two of us and the child! No, happiness is not in all those material things – serenity – harmony in all things – (in expenditure and income, too) that’s the secret of all happiness.
This afternoon Saskia came to play with little Vincent. I think she’s more robust, he mustn’t be made too soft by fondling and caresses – he’d begin to whine, become a spoilt child – that must not happen. It’s good to have them together so often – the best way to see where my way of bringing him up falls short is through comparison. But he’s so lovely and sweet with his head of golden curls. I had him on my lap this evening, with his back to the lamp.– His little face was completely in shadow and there was a halo of golden curls around it.
Big white clouds are being tossed around by the wind – driven – across the sky, the child is watching them: “Mama, the sky’s going away.”
I took the first part of Vincent’s letters to Jan! Am I doing the right thing? In God’s name – what else could I do! I know that he’s honest and I trust him. But nevertheless I’ll reread the other letters carefully one more time – so that nothing gets into strange hands that shouldn’t; that mustn’t happen. It’s so difficult, so difficult.– Would Theo approve? I’m still not at peace with myself about that.
This evening a letter from the Kunstkring, the exhibition is on May – in the new rooms. So finally it’s been decided!
A lovely sunny day. There’s a thrush in the tree in front of our house; it’s singing beautifully. How new this is for me – those birds, those flowers, those plants – I see for the first time now that I was brought up in an upstairs flat in the city and never, never went to the country as a child! Happily, little Vincent can enjoy all that now – when he hears a bird singing, such a sweet, surprised expression spreads across his little face! How his father also loved flowers and birds. I always see him in my mind’s eye, walking around with the child in his arms early in the morning and letting him look out of the window at the birds: “that fly far, far away to Grandma,” he’d say. What a cosy little nest our home in Paris was, upstairs among that lovely, big tree that stood outside the door. And how happy we were in it. Theo also loved L’oiseau by Michelet so much – I’ve just read it again – but if I were to know more about birds and recognize them – I’d find it even more beautiful.
Today, for the first time, I’ve a feeling of boredom, of emptiness – that makes me find everything dreary – despite the thoughts of Theo that never leave me for a moment – I usually still have a great appetite to do something – a great interest in things; if only I can keep that.
Little peace or quiet in me. Jan has the letters – I haven’t heard from him – I once wrote a heated letter – and now I’m too proud to go round there – how will it end! Ma v. G. has been here for a few days – oh, the halo around her head is already beginning to fade as far as I’m concerned – Theo saw something different in her – and I saw it too – from what she really is! Now I see all the sides of her that Anna and Wil and Lies see – but really good of Willetje to put up with her so. All the same, her presence here does me good – like having a piece of Theo here – in the afternoon we sit cosily together in the conservatory and talk about everything, about family matters, about everything that’s happened, I so like to hear about it. I also need to find out a lot more about Vincent – and then I’m going to write everything down, – oh, I think back with longing to my wonderful long winter evenings. Now I can no longer have Theo with me, I’m best alone – how difficult it would be to become accustomed to living with someone again. I can already barely write with other people around me – this evening I read something in the paper about how brain cells work. 
Wonderful spring days and beautiful evenings with silver moonlight. A tree in blossom for the first time today – bird cherry – oh, the child’s delight with that sprig of blossom in his little hand – he’s so much more beautiful and pure and sweet than that blossom.
Went for a walk in the Wattez tree nursery yesterday morning – yet again discovered something completely new in the world – if my boy doesn’t develop into an artist, I’d like to make a tree nurseryman out of him – what a wonderful, healthy life – that life in and with nature, helping to cultivate, produce, grow – it’s almost as wonderful as raising and bringing up children.
The young Wattez to whom I said something like: “what a healthy life,” answered triumphantly: “I’ve never been ill a day in my life”, he picked all kinds of lovely sprigs for us – willow sprigs in blossom – berberis, variegated holly, cedar sprigs with those tiny red berries – all wonderful discoveries for me. We sent the little bouquet to poor, sick Wil – who was so pleased with it. 
A trip to Hilversum today – Annie not at home – saw their house anyway.– They’ve copied all sorts of things of ours – it’s not a pleasant feeling when I go there – I prefer to be at home. By chance I spoke to Dina Reinhold – who’s planning to spend a few months in the country this summer, I’m really looking forward to seeing her now and then – I live so far away from everything, an ordinary chat now and again will do me good. Free tells me this evening that Jan has made a new painting – with strong colours, a complete departure from the dull matt colours he used before – he has Vincent to thank for that – he won’t want to admit it, that’s why he’s avoiding me – I never see him at all now – but it’s true all the same. I’ll be curious to learn how and when I’ll see him again and what he’ll say – I wish he was my friend and that I dared to trust him completely!
Went for a lovely walk with Mother and the child this afternoon – I discover thousands of wonders in nature every day, the existence of which I didn’t even dream of before.– We saw fir-cones growing on trees for the first time, the child was as pleased about it as I was – we picked a handful of berberis sprigs – oh so lovely! Briefly met Jan and Holst – they very friendly and extremely polite – I simply – very cool without being unfriendly – I was coming through the potato field. They were walking in the garden and came to meet me – that was already a lot on Jan’s part.
Tomorrow is our wedding anniversary – it’s three years ago now.–
This evening I saw a blackbird high up in the branches of a still leafless birch – he sang – it sounded so beautiful in the quiet evening air – and he swayed so lustily and free high up there, high in the air, for the first time, I felt something of that if only I were a bird. I’d like to be everything, everything: a flower, a leaf, a bird, anything but what I am – a poor, unhappy person with the thirst and the hunger in me for the infinite, the eternal – the absolute – and yet shackled to the most material things in the world – eating, drinking, housekeeping. There’s something of the infinite in my love for my boy – but it’s not enough for me – every day he takes a step further away from me, becomes more independent – he needs me less. That’s good – that’s what must happen – but I – I remain with my poor, discontented heart, that still wants so much, desires so much. My life didn’t begin until three years ago – I had always gone through life with my eyes half closed. Theo taught me to see, taught me to live – is everything over for me now?.
On my own again at last, thank goodness! I can take refuge in my faithful little book again. “Only the written thought remains.” I must learn to express thoughts correctly and so write a lot.– I enjoyed having Ma with me – but more than anything I prefer to be alone – alone with my books – the child – nature all around me – then I maintain my serenity and everything is in equilibrium. If I come into contact with people – particularly with people I knew years ago – everything in me is unpleasantly shocked and confused – I’m gradually beginning to get the right to organize my life the way I want – one only has that right if one is independent – I feel that I’m beginning to acquire it and I want to use it, too. I don’t want to isolate myself from people, but only have dealings with those whose company I find pleasant – to surrender myself completely to someone – I don’t believe that will happen easily again – it’s another period of transition in everything for me – a transition to what? A sensible, independent, irreproachable woman and mother – a fine ideal to have as a goal but oh, heavens. I have so little sense, I let myself be controlled by impressions of the moment – I have so little ability to think things through logically – and I can’t conquer my laziness. If I wasn’t so lazy and had greater order and regularity in my work, I might be able to do something – now it’s always fragments – I have a book – doesn’t matter which – at first it controls me, I absorb it – I find something human in it – that attracts me – something flickers in my mind – but it soon burns out, the little light – and this is followed by days of dullness and grimness – of nothing. One thing comforts me then, makes those moods less dreadful than before. I have work that always goes on – looking after the child. If he’s had what he needed all day long – fresh country air – food, drink, sleep at the right time and nothing to make him overexcited or nervous, then that day has been good for him – that’s a good thought.
Lien makes him nervous, restless, overexcited and difficult – I foresee there will always be a struggle about that point in the future
Theo’s birthday – I haven’t even been able to put flowers on his grave – the child isn’t very well, feverish at night – I dared not take him with me nor leave him alone at home. Darling, darling, I haven’t forgotten you – nor thought less about you – because of it. This morning I sat in the summer house on the hillock – with the child playing in the sand beside me – the sun shone so warmly, the air was sweet and spring like – I felt, oh how beautiful everything is, but how empty the world is without him. A concert yesterday evening where Bep sang and Aaf played.– Henri came to fetch me after the interval – there was something safe in the way he took my arm – his sympathy radiates something benevolent that always does me good. I was bothered by being in that full auditorium, among all those people, I am and feel very different from all of them – sometimes I feel as though I still want to hide in my big, black veil, that big, black veil of “deep mourning”, as it is called, in it I was cut off from the others. All the same, I’m glad I’ve seen Aaf play! I want to see if I can describe it. A tall, thin figure – in a softly draped white embroidered dress, an outfit with a crimson Italian scarf.– Without a trace of coquettishness or desire to stand out – and attractive precisely because of this.– As she entered she held the violin casually in her left hand – bowed, not gracefully because she isn’t – yet expressively – “I bow because I want to respond to the courtesy of your applause – not to appear sweet or friendly.” Anyway her face expressed that clearly enough.– Deathly pale – with glittering, shining brown eyes – which seem to be searching for something far, far in the distance, she stood there, with a determined twist to her mouth – not thinking about the audience, about all those people below her – not thinking about the impression she was making, or how they’re behaving, or what she’d do – but indescribably energetic – powerful – nervous with only that slightly Chinese curved line in her eyes – something languorous – something of an odalisque or a sphynx. Compared to her, Bep was an ordinary, insignificant little blonde – but Bep’s voice is powerful and robust – I thought it was wonderful – I wish I could tell Bep something about what she lacks – I’d like to save her from all that useless time that I frittered away in my youth, from the vanity of the world – oh, it’s not about a frill or a piece of ribbon – or a bit of this or that, which I used to make myself unhappy about, or at least brood about – I’m thinking about Theo’s words – my dear, never lose sight of the difference between the big and the small.– Although I can’t entirely wrench myself away, I do now feel – what is big and what is small. I’m going to write to Ma now – she and I – we remember this day together, it used to be a celebration for both of us, but it no longer is for anyone. Darling, my dear sweet Theo, I have so much to thank you for, how I love you, how grateful I am to you – oh, if only I could tell you just once more.
Listened to the nightingales with Anna this evening – we walked up and down as we used to in the old days, when as young girls we accompanied each other from the Schans to the Kade and from the Kade to the Schans. Now it was down to the end of the lane – across the potato field and the same way back: across the field down to the end of the lane – it was delightfully fresh outside – we had an old-fashioned cosy chat about everything as we used to – about things we otherwise don’t discuss, too – for a marvel, I talked about myself.– When we went our different ways – an affectionate kiss – it really does one good to have someone one trusts.
I’m reading Musset – his biography by his brother Paul – I’ve found many fine things in it – “it is only through sorrow that one learns the truth” and then the reflections when he was thirty – I must copy it out. 
 It’s grey and rainy and gloomy outside, and inside too – I’m dull and dejected, my grief is becoming master of my thoughts because I feel weak. The child with his head of golden curls is my only ray of light. How much there is tossing about in me, that wants to express itself, everything that I have to say – the greatest happiness in the greatest sorrow – it’s been said by so many before me – why should I try it again? But it doesn’t give me any peace.– Patience, a little more patience – it’s not yet ripe! Perhaps it never will be!
It’s spring – suddenly a green veil has been thrown over nature – and here and there in its midst there’s the wealth and infinite delicacy of the pale blossom – the nightingales sing outside my window in the evening – I enjoy it very much – all of it, but I feel twice as alone.
Vincent’s exhibition in The Hague is on Sunday – what will that day bring? Satisfaction or disappointment – how long I’ve been hoping for it – at last it will happen.
I’ve read En ménage by Huysmans again – there’s no other book that reminds me so much of our life in Paris as that one, not because of the main characters, thank God, but because of those small details of housekeeping – and the city itself! As I read, it was as if for one infinitesimally tiny moment I was suddenly transported to our little home – as though I heard Theo putting the key in the door – his footstep on the stairs – oh the indescribable pain of one such moment. One can suffer more in one minute than in days or years! Darling, darling I miss you so, I long for you so! The exhibition was postponed again – now it’s to be tomorrow, at last.
Holst visited Anna and Jan this morning and in the lane I met Der Kinderen – he was pleasant and friendly – he turned back as we parted to call out that little Vincent looked so much better – Theo would have done that too!
The opening took place on May. It was not splendid – not enough trouble had been taken for that – but there was space and light for viewing the paintings – that was all. A lot of people came in the afternoon – I got the greatest pleasure from the response of old Israëls – he thought some of them were very good – but he said there was a boundary between things that can be painted and those that can’t – and Vincent had often wanted to paint things that were impossible, e.g. the sun. But where he had selected things that were within his range, he’d delivered very fine work. He compared him with Wagner.– Toorop was charming, as always – human, simple, captivating. Fortunately Wil was there too – we had a wonderful day together – that evening I slept at Ma’s in Leiden. Oh, all those memories in The Hague! Those wonderful, carefree days I spent there with Theo, all those places, they speak to me. 
It’s Jan V.’s birthday today – I went there this evening with Martha and Free, and Holst came too. Martha was pithy and amusing. She talked about Italian books and cuckoos’ nests, about Rome and about the children. I only enjoyed myself with her. Jan was stiff – talked a lot but not jovial, not open, not simple, sometimes there’s something very artificial in the way he speaks. Free was quiet and sat looking at pictures, as he calls it. All the same, it was an event for me, an evening like that – I was a little bit quiet and shy, or rather I was thinking about very different things from them. Now I’m home! – Oh Theo, Theo how different everything was – when you were with me – I’m going backwards so fast without you, I’m becoming commonplace – banal, everything you taught me not to be. The child’s sleeping beautifully in his dear little cot – thank God.
I’m also worried about Pa. 
Mrs Dirks has died. Many happy memories of my youth are associated with her – “So, little Jo” – she always said so cheerfully when I came – she loved to talk and it was pleasant to pay her a visit. Anna hadn’t seen her recently – Jan saw to it that I was asked not to come.– I think that’s a nasty way to behave – that desire to ignore or reduce to as small as possible – the grief or the distress.
I’ve read Les rois en exil.– It’s as though I’ve only just learned to understand what I read – it went straight to my heart. I could give an explanation of Daudet’s talent now – certainly theatrical, calculated to have an effect – but something human, something very good in it.
I’ve enjoyed having Wil here, one day – one lovely, sunny day – sweet, loyal sister – you’re still the only one for whom I can feel something of what I felt for Theo. Oh my sweet, only, faithful darling, I love you so much – so much, so much.
The moon’s rising, above the oak trees, as large as a silver globe that emits a soft light. It’s shining straight into my window – I’m sitting alone by my lamp, alone – with a head full of thoughts, not one of which I can write down. The world is moving around me – I can hear the sound of music from one side of the house – and on the other side they’re walking in the garden, everyone is busy in their own way – and the child sleeps and I sit alone. (He picked the first strawberry today, that was nice!)
The life of George Eliot and her letters are keeping me occupied at the moment. I’m finding thousands of things in them that I also felt and lived through myself – everything – including the urge to create – but the creation itself, alas – will probably never come to me. And then the background of scholarly education she had! How far, far above all the women of our century she stands – in knowledge, character and intellect. The relationship with Lewes is fine – is there a second example, in the literature of any country – of two souls – so fully worthy of one another? How I would like to find out more intimate details of their relationship – something about their daily life – those small, revealing features are missing – but one can completely and utterly follow their spiritual or intellectual life. The list of books that they read! It’s something that almost dumbfounds one, where did they get them all – those out-of-the-way scholarly, abstract subjects – here and there I find an old friend – Life of Charlotte Brontë e.g., how I enjoyed that, too. Sometimes I reproach myself that I read too much, then I ask myself: what use is it – of going deeply into all sorts of abstractions – but then when I think of the illustrious examples of Shelley, and G. Eliot with Lewes, then I draw courage again. Courage, that’s what I need at the moment – the busy time – the season is in full swing for me, the house is full of guests – I have to keep devising meals the whole time – and get cross with the maids – those are my two main occupations. Eliot called them ‘malheurs de cuisine’.– Yet they were happy, those two – Lewes and she – and they didn’t have a busy household as I do. How frequently they moved from place to place, but how good – and useful – that is – new points of view each time, new impressions – if I can do it too, later on I’ll take little Vincent and also live now here, then there. How can I best act for him? I think about it all the time – he’s now becoming so like a person – the babyish phase is over for him – he’s already becoming very logical in his actions and words.– Perhaps the way ahead will emerge naturally when he’s older.
I went on a beautiful walk to Valkeveen with the child and Lien Dirks today. Through a small sandy avenue of oaks, suddenly arriving at the sea – silver grey today, with little white crests – that was the end of the expedition. Oh, that wonderful look on the child’s face when he saw the sea – so intent, as though he wanted to take it all in all at once, his pupils contracted so! The walk is an oasis in my current desert – how glad I’ll be when these few busy months are over again! I can’t even find time to read – enough said.
The Keuze-tentoonstelling opens on Sunday, I hope I’ll be able to go with Wil. The child’s been a little unwell, that was such a horrid week – him not scampering in the garden, such an unusual thing!
Bleak, stormy weather – the trees lash to and fro – now, for the first time, I understand all those comparisons with nature that people make – we have our storms and it’s we who, just like the trees, are rocked to and fro by a force that they don’t know. And on balmy summer evenings they stand so peaceful and calm as though nothing can ever harm them again. That’s how it goes with our happiness – we feel as if it can never be any different!
A sweet letter from Liesje this evening.– She’s expecting her baby quite soon, Oh how beautiful it is, how beautiful it is – mother nature! Not as they used to talk about it at home – what was most important then were the layette and the nurse and the doctor and the mother’s pain – but as I now understand it – the infinite – living on, the divineness of love!– A baby for Lies – I’ll love it a lot, I hope that it’s a girl – if it’s a boy, it will be called Theo – oh, I wouldn’t like that – little Vincent’s oldest son – he must be a little Theo – oh my dear little head of golden curls, what high hopes your mother has for you – and what will life bring! As long as you’re happy – anyhow – anyhow! He was indescribably sweet and lovely today – I can never look at him enough. If only I could describe it – because it passes and there will be nothing left once he’s a big boy – that delicate, fine pink face, surrounded by those soft golden curls – and the thoughtfulness of those blue – light blue eyes – oh at such moments he’s so delicate and fine – like a flower or something of a butterfly – I can’t say how – and sometimes, when he laughs so clearly and naughtily and his eyes sparkle with fun, then everything is life and movement and he’s like a prince who radiates light. And he’s always lovely and sweet.
Opening of the Keuze-tentoonstelling. I saw so many good things – The Little Bride by Thijs Maris – it’s as fine and delicate as our happiness was – and the large work by Israëls – Alone in the World – that’s gloomy and miserable, like my grief!
I’m saddened that they didn’t select two better works by Vincent – did Jan do it deliberately or does he really misunderstand him so? I’m beginning to make a plan for an exhibition in Arti, of only works by Vincent, that has to come sooner or later.
How alone I felt among all those masses of people. Der Kinderen was the friendliest, his pleasant greeting has stuck in my memory. I think Holst’s a prig – Toorop was there – Breitner – Van Eeden – Jolles – all of them people that I half-know – I’m unsettled and boring – I’m going to bed so that I can begin an ordinary day tomorrow with new courage. Will everything be different once the child has grown up!
Today Willem and Tonia came for coffee. He looked as though he was wearing his Sunday best – which displayed little taste and did nothing for his appearance – an ugly blue jacket, light checked trousers, a purple tie and a shiny top hat. But he was so cordial and nice and talked so sensibly and wittily that I could listen to him with pleasure – which happens to me seldom since Theo’s death.– He went into raptures about the Monticellis and as a result he started talking about art – about Rembrandt, about his travels – (that fine Rembrandt in Brunswick), but she didn’t say one nice or sympathetic thing.– She looks pretty, her head has a classical shape, her clothes were elegant, but otherwise banal, banal, banal.– I’m afraid that it will be a marriage like Dries & Annie’s.– They make up too little of one entity – it’s as though she’s hours away from him, can’t follow him, and he can’t follow her into her little world of friends and finery and fashionableness – she mentioned two castles, where she was going to stay – what will their marriage be like? Oh how different Theo and I were – I didn’t always understand him, but I so wanted to understand him – and often still managed to feel it by instinct – and we matched each other so well, “you’re a little woman made just for me,” he sometimes said – oh, oh, oh!
Anna and Lien were with me yesterday evening – it did me good to have company again for an evening.– Anna was delightful – Jan’s made a sweet, lovely wife of her.– Why is my pen so clumsy and why can’t I reproduce what I so clearly feel? I’m anxious and flustered – if only I could write down what I wanted – then inner peace would come.
But I must be careful and combat that nervous agitation – I mustn’t work too much with my brain – although I don’t actually do any work, it’s just thinking, thinking, thinking – and everything is useless and fruitless. A good idea does come along once in a while, though – but it gets lost at once in all sorts of other useless thoughts. About the child – his upbringing, his future, I think a lot about them. I must be gentler with him – because he copies my angry words – that mustn’t happen – how kind and gentle and sensible Theo would have been with him! Poor, poor child – what a useless mother he has in me. Always so preoccupied and quiet – I should play with him more and be cheerful with him – but how can I – how can I – with that sorrowful, lonely feeling in me.– But I sense that something’s wrong – oh God, oh God, what does life have in store for me – I see no light and have so little courage. But in my diary I mustn’t always write reflections about myself – rather describe something I’ve seen – be more objective.– I want to practise writing descriptions.
I went for a walk with the child this evening – at sunset.
A big white house at the end of the oak avenue, the garden – the fence – the pavement – everything full, full of red roses – they creep through the bars of the fence and turn their heads towards us.– Past the house an avenue of wild pear trees – here and there a pine or cedar – and finally coppices full of jasmine, it looks like one huge bridal bouquet – the branches loaded with blossom sway beautifully to and fro above the shrubs. We pick large bunches of them. Back through the avenue again to the white house and there I suddenly see a faint red light shining through silver p. leaves – the sun’s going down, right behind the silver poplars – the grass has been mown and the wonderful smell of hay caresses me – it’s so beautiful, so beautiful – that one has to be very happy or very unhappy to sense it. The child is part of it all. He’s just as lovely and delicate and fine as the flowers.– He helped pick the flowers with great enthusiasm and when his little hands were full he said: “it’s enough now Mama, Vincent has enough now.” Sometimes I wish that the child had already grown up.–
Anna and I have started to work together – we wanted to study history but we’ve taken the biography of Michelangelo by Emile Olliver so as to have a starting point. That brings us to the Renaissance – Italian history and all kinds of things. They’re wonderful evenings, Anna is angelically sweet – there’s so much beauty and sweetness and good in her. I wish that she was always like that.
She’s coming again this evening – I want to do some more work.– The desire in me to write is becoming stronger than ever, I see and feel much more clearly – yesterday for a while it was as though I had to pick up the pen, but then it suddenly fades and has disappeared. And once again I say to myself – practise, practise: after all, I can’t become something good just like that – how long and how much Van Deyssel wrote before he actually created something good. But I can’t decide – I have to wait until the urge to create becomes so strong – that I can’t ignore it – but I really don’t know whether or not it’s also due in large part to laziness – I believe it is.
Each time I see something or someone that touches me, I’ll always try to write it down – Freule De Court e.g. She’s a special person whom I’ve come across on my way. She’s , small and a bit lopsided – a pleasant, impressive face – I’d say a French type from the days of the Revolution – fine straight nose, proud blue eyes and silver white hair that she wears combed up high in front and then covered with a small black lace scarf, so that the forehead remains completely exposed. If she’s tired or a bit listless she’s an ordinary old woman – almost a witch in a simple brown dress, stumbling along on her stick – but when she ignites during a conversation – then everything changes and she becomes the proud noble lady that she in fact is – she bridles – her eyes sparkle – and all her features relax or rather become a noble, fine whole. Her hobby is painting – she’s already sitting at her easel at o’clock in the morning, and yesterday she sat outside in a strong wind from to half past two with eyes that were full of windblown sand – painting outside. If she’s still alive next year – she’ll come back here – She thinks it’s wonderful here. Now I’m going to read my Michelangelo.
After Freule De Court and her guests – the Bakker Korffs – the ladies Mensing and Liernur – the firm, as they call themselves – have arrived. It’s a pleasant memory when I think about them – kind and affectionate and obliging – in the evenings we talked very enjoyably about all kinds of things – Mensing is an artist, Liernur a schoolmistress. Together they make a nice whole. Mensing’s face is most interesting – she resembles William III of England, decisive – the narrow face – the high forehead – the hook nose – a very unusual type. She always sat under the apple tree and played with the child.
During their time here there were also the Americans – ordinary types, not noble at all. Now Jozef Cramer and his wife are coming tomorrow – I’m really looking forward to it – they are at least cultured folk. 
I’ve been plagued with earache all summer long – I feel weak and listless after that small operation this week – I’ve been through a very unpleasant time – and oh, what may be lying in store for me. But the child is sweeter than ever – he’s almost too pretty and too sweet – he’s a gorgeous little angel – “sweet little mummy” – he says to me sometimes – to me it’s the most wonderful music.
I’ve read Couperus’s Extaze – it gripped me – as no other book has done in ages – it’s as though it was written from my soul – I think it’s so good that I’d like to thank him for having written it.
Martha doesn’t think it’s that good – Anna does – which of the two would have the more proper feeling? I had expected Anna this evening – but she’s not coming – I’m going to write letters now – I’m so alone, this evening, so alone!
In fact the days are passing me by monotonously – but how intense the impressions I receive are – how much and deeply I live, it’s almost too tiring for me – everything grips me too much. If only I was more methodical, what might remain of all those things – but they slip past so quickly – perhaps I should start by working on and absorbing everything inwardly.
Closest to my heart is the exhibition of Vincent’s work that will be held in the Panorama gallery in December. I discussed it with Van Kesteren myself, and Jan Veth and Holst will arrange it. That’s another thing to look forward to. And then – Wil’s passed her examination! I’m not anxious about her any more now – she’ll find her way now – thank God, thank God that tension is over.
Yesterday was a strange day. First thing in the afternoon I went for a walk with Pa and the child, along ’s Gravelandseweg – it was a beautiful, quiet autumn day. After dinner I went along to Amsterdam to hear Beb sing in Ons Huis. It was quite a sight, the auditorium was not full of ladies and gentlemen in fine clothes – but of people in their shabby things with tired, weather-beaten faces, who also had an evening of enjoyment and relaxation at last. I watched the expressions on the faces during the different numbers, the Grieg sonata left them cold – nobody understood any of it – the songs that Beb sung were enjoyed very much – and they became very sentimental during the sad endings – their eyes were full of tears. The recitations were also very well received, the Blinde by Van Beers & Met z’n achten & ’t Breistertje. It was a pleasant evening. And the view from the station of the city by night was enchantingly beautiful.
But I was very tired and today I’ve been able to do no more than rest under the apple tree in the garden – without actually doing anything. Tomorrow I’ll begin translating something.– I must earn some extra money.
As always, George Eliot comforted me and did me good – something that I never find in people – empathy and compassion – I do find that in books, however – so it has existed, thank God – in the hearts of those few outstanding individuals who live on after their death and then do even more good than many during their lives. I find so little sympathy around me and long so for something to devote myself to, someone to love – if only Martha wanted! but she’s too indifferent or – too careless.– My abundance of tenderness or love, whatever it is – I now devote solely to the child – (who can never have too much of it) – and the cat. My sweet little black puss, I never thought that I’d become so attached to you. 
How I’m dreading that day of October. 
My New Year’s Eve! I hold that evening dear – I love reflecting for a while at the transition from one year to another and ask myself: what have I done in this year? This is already the second time that I’ll live through that day without Theo – and I celebrated it with him twice! That first time, what a good, happy day that was.– How rich I felt surrounded by so much love – I can still see Theo’s face so clearly when he surprised me in the morning with that lovely workbasket and then the flask – “it comes from a long way away – it comes from the little boy”, oh that sweet, friendly face and that soft, fond voice.– And how friendly the little drawing room was with all those lovely flowers and a comforting fire – I recall how I sat in front of the fire with a pretty dress for the child, who hadn’t yet arrived, on my lap. How rich we were, how happy we were together.
 But a year later – oh, then everything was still good in the morning – how kindly he came to meet me with the little boy on his arm – and how generous he had been to me – but in the evening – that was the beginning of all that long misery – that I cannot describe!
And now I’m alone, oh so alone.– What will this new year bring. I must work more – be more active.– I’m so tired and listless sometimes – I’d rather sleep – but that’s not possible – I still have so much to do. If only I could find my equilibrium again as I did last winter – how well I worked then and I wasn’t unhappy, although I felt sad.– And now I sometimes have such hopeless, gloomy moods.– That mustn’t be. Theo, darling, I shall look after our little boy well and do my best to be a good example for him – I promise you that, my own, dear husband, whom I love so much, oh so much. Stay around us with your spirit – your spirit of love, of humility and simplicity – I need it so badly.
I’m going through bleak, unpleasant days. Where is my calmness, my serenity? I’m not working, I do nothing, I creep through my days – and outdoors they are such delightful, beautiful sunny autumn days. In the mornings I go for a walk with the child but it’s joyless – there’s something confused inside me, no longer in equilibrium. In my opinion that squabblingp with Jan is to blame. Oh why aren’t they more friendly and affectionate with me – they understand me so little. Anna dropped in this evening, but full of cheerfulness, all she did was talk about her hard work with Jan and all their preoccupations – what can I say in reply!
This afternoon I had a nice visit from the young woman, (who’s also been left with one child, like me) – Mrs Melling – is her name. We told each other about how happy we’d been and how sad and alone we are now – it really did some good, we understood one another well. But she’s a pretty, worldly woman – she’ll find solace sooner than I.
The days have passed unmarked and have brought me to my senses again.
The child is beautiful – particularly beautiful this evening in his little dark green dress, which makes his blond curls stand out so nicely. The dark green is decorated with a little frill of yellow silk which looks very good – he looks like a royal child in it.
There’s something strange in the house – a new element, a new resident. Oh, if only I didn’t need it, all these strange people in my house – but perhaps the enforced distraction is beneficial. She’s a young lady of – schoolmistress at the school – she comes from a long way away, all the way from Maastricht, where her parents live – during the first few days she was pale and quiet, not surprisingly, poor child. Oh I know that feeling so well – from when I was in London and in Elburg – the bliss of being able to talk about home – showing the portraits – I remember it all so well. I hope that she’ll start to feel at home here – and like it here. There’s something pleasurable about the notion of being able to create a home for some people. At the moment my head is so empty – I need to work with my hands to do anything at all.
Last week I read Theo’s and my letters until deep into the night – Theo’s letters! is it all a dream?– Dear God, is there anyone whose life is as enigmatic as mine?– That brief dream of happiness, did it ever exist? Yes that’s why I’m still too aware of the sweetness of the memory – of those wonderful memories of him, full of love. Theo, Theo, sometimes there’s such a need to call on you – whether to have you around me, or to protect us. Oh, if you only knew how your little wife – your darling child – you remember – how sad and alone she always is – what sympathy you’d have with her.–
They say Verlaine will give a lecture in Amsterdam – I must go – it’s something of Theo – oh, the pleasure of hearing French again – good, melodious French. Something tells me that that evening will be momentous for me – oh, I have premonitions like that so often and they come to nothing.
If men are in a mood like the one I’m in at the moment – then they seek a way to numb the pain – a moment’s pleasure with women – oh, how I understand Theo’s life in Paris – poor darling, how often he felt unhappy and then sought – sought solace – which only resulted in remorse. We women bear it, but – it makes us ill and miserable, and what’s the good of that!! 
Tomorrow Ma Van Gogh is coming to stay, splendid – something of Theo around me.
She stayed with me for a week and she brought much that was sweet and enjoyable and affectionate into the house – but I had completely lost myself – my soul slumbered all too quietly inside me – only the everyday I lived on. That’s why I’d be afraid to have Ma here all the time – which is something that’s hanging over my head – and which on the one hand would give a marvellous feeling of fulfilment – Theo’s mother – he would approve!
Today I had another long, quiet, peaceful Sunday to myself – I read Verlaine, Bonheur – Maeterlinck (Serres chaudes), finally this evening Goncourt, La Maison d’un Artiste. I still recall it clearly, that house at Boulevard Montmorency, with what a sense of reverence I walked past it when I was staying in Passy with Dries, four years ago now. Oh, if only I could have read this book with Theo – how much I failed to do – how much more I could have been to him at that time.–
That evening with Verlaine – a peculiar mixture of all sorts – an audience consisting of all our young artists on the one hand, and inconsequential aristocrats on the other – Verlaine himself – the familiar high forehead – the bald head – the sinister set of his mouth – I saw on his face how strange and odd he must have been feeling on such an occasion. I heard little of his reading – my observations about him in public were all I got out of that evening (which cost me two and a half guilders). 
Koos v.d. Hoeven is coming tomorrow, she’s staying with Anna – I’m pleased she’s here – she’s one of the few people who are particularly sympathetic to me – all the same, I don’t believe she’s very deep but she’s friendly and cheerful and witty in conversation.
Little Vincent is so sweet and so beautiful!
Saw the good Thijs Maris at Wisselingh’s – the girl in the sand with a dune behind her and the butterflies in the air above her – oh so enchanting, I can see it in front of me now that I think back – delicate, fine, infinitely delicate – in my imagination I see Theo’s hand pointing – the lovely red smudge of that one butterfly – the note that sings – oh, going to Wisselingh is such painful pleasure for me. 
Had a pleasant time at Martha’s – sat on the bench below the veranda – had a brief chat – brought Free’s new book – Johannes Viator – home with me. Spent the whole evening reading it – there’s a lot – a lot that’s beautiful in it – many beautiful thoughts, expressed in a beautiful form – but it’s much, much too long and sometimes so contrived! His own personality, vain, very selfish, comes out in the book – but besides that beautiful, really beautiful – Martha’s influence – that elevates the book. The episode with the French girl is – it couldn’t be more sentimental and contrived – but the weasel – oh so lovely and fine. 
The major issue in Het boek van de liefde is: is love between man and woman physical love – the highest that exists or is it – as he fears and believes, what binds him in his life, embittered: is it low, mean, bad – is it doing what the animals do! Oh, the question’s not new and in how many human hearts will it already have come up.– But anyone who’s truly experienced love won’t ask it again, they already know – that it’s the highest, the only, the great, absolute happiness – creation, with all the urges there are in us for something good, something great. Oh, often raped, abused, defiled – yet it’s the highest that a human can achieve. And what’s born as a result of impregnation, where two people give themselves to each other, not just with their bodies but with their complete selves and souls – oh, such a love child becomes a privileged individual among – the mortals.– Michelet says, “The mother conceived it in heaven.” 
And for someone who knows this – someone who carries this as a firm belief – to that person v. Eeden’s writing seems to have soiled a lot of words for nothing – said a lot that wasn’t worth the trouble – said a lot, oh – but behind those words there’s nothing, all his cries about the Lord, the Lord and those sermons and then that eternal sea – I implore you, what does that add? We all know that he loves flowers and nature and animals a lot, we know that from De kleine Johannes – but if he really had felt so strongly at one with nature – he would also have had a better understanding of love. She – Martha – knew better, women always know that better – Cecile van Couperus knew it too. But in Quaerts one can tolerate his platonic love better, he comes out clearly in favour of it – admits that he’s a singular creature who divides his life into two parts – the animal – and the soul – then we say at once: friend you’ve got it completely wrong – but that’s just the way you’re made – (that’s how Couperus did it) so that’s how you’ll remain. But v. Eeden flirts with it so strangely, he doesn’t approve, but he does it anyway and creates two children and then has regrets and it’s wailing and moaning without end, of sleepless nights etc. etc. Much about nothing. 
Van Eeden you do not know life – in any depth – you have everything your heart desires and now you’re a bit gloomy and are searching for something – what do you know about sorrow, distress – loneliness – I compare Verlaine and v. Eeden – if Free ever came out of himself for once perhaps he’d make really good things – now he falters when it comes to depth and truth.–
I’ve read some more of the book – and not everything I’ve written above is true – because the book is good!
New Year’s Eve – the third one I’m spending without him. Everything’s empty, everything around me has gone – except the child, the child.
Oudejaarsavond – de derde dien ik doorbreng zonder hem. Alles is leeg, alles is weg om mij heen – behalve het kind, het kind.
What will the new year bring? The same anxiety, the same trouble, the same sorrow? Oh, I’ll accept anything as long as the child can remain the same source of great, eternal joy for me.
In Keats’s Endymion I find


Come then, Sorrow!
Sweetest Sorrow –
Like an own babe I nurse thee on my breast –
I thought to leave thee
And deceive thee
But now of all the world I love thee best. 
And through all those months Sorrow has been my only companion – Oh, the sorrow remains, remains – occupies an ever greater space.
Once in a while a touch of spiritual pleasure – e.g. meeting Thijm. He came to see the paintings and he thinks they’re splendid, that’s all.
Only the child becomes lovelier, sweeter, more sensible all the time.
My heart feels so much for Martha – sometimes she’s so kind and friendly to me and their surroundings are so beautiful, I’d always want to go there, and yet I’m best at home.
Read Le Dr. Pascal – enjoyed it.
I’m pleased about Bep’s engagement to Louis Valk – I don’t know him, but he seems to be kind and simple and very deeply in love with her. I hope that they’ll be very, very happy.
I’m in a depressed mood – I’m tired and weak– but I hope to rise above it soon now.
I’m beginning to translate Calmire – that type of work, even though it’s a bit mechanical, will help me a lot I think. Outside it’s grey – rainy – inside more cheerful – clearer than it’s been for a long time.
New Year’s Eve again – another year full of anxiety and conflict and great sadness behind me. I don’t have many good things that I’ve done to look back on – I pottered around during the winter and read a lot in the evenings – gave lessons to Adeline – the child was the centre of everything during the day.– The summer was horrible, more than busy and I was hopelessly weak and tired – I don’t know how I got through it. A great event this year was Vincent’s exhibition in Amsterdam – it kept me busy for a long time. And now a new winter lies ahead of me – and I’ll start with courage.
Today is Adeline’s birthday – we made music this evening and talked a lot (with Miss Mensing about the Salvation Army) and I’m glad I’ve been able to do something for her, at least. She thanked me so warmly when she went upstairs. My first and last thought of every year, of every day, is of you, my darling, my dear husband, I love you so much, so much.–
Was in Baarn with Thijm and his wife, a wonderful afternoon. He and Jopie came to meet us from the train – we walked through the woods to their house – an idyllic, white forester’s house covered in Virginia creeper in the middle of the woods. A delightfully welcoming living room – old portraits on the wall, old furniture – everything dark and welcoming – beautiful flowers in the hall.– But his study – oh, how shabby and bare and miserable – how unjust the world is – someone who works so hard and so well – in such a cubbyhole.
Was in Baarn. Spent a few moments at Thijm’s. Saw marvellous things in the woods.
The old year has given way to the new – almost unnoticed. We stayed in Leiden – after spending Christmas in Amsterdam. In Leiden it was enjoyable, friendly and affectionate – it does so much good to feel that there are still people who are fond of you. Anna was so sweet – she came to my room on New Year’s Eve – poured her heart out – oh, she’s not happy either – oh that lack of sympathy for your husband must be terrible! 
Went to the sea in Katwijk on New Year’s Day.– Big waves made a lot of noise as they came crashing in – and arching finely and delicately above them was a faintly tinted rainbow. Was it a symbol of something good that awaited us in the New Year?
Nothing much that’s good so far – very heavy cold – maid ill – now the child’s got a cold, too; he coughs – something unusual for him – I’m anxious about it.– Oh, he was so indescribably sweet this whole long Sunday, which I spent with him on my own – so good and sweet!
The child’s fourth birthday! Oh that feeling of gratitude that I have him – I can’t stop myself being tormented by the thought of what I would have been if I had never had him.
The house is pervaded by the scent of the pine branches that decorate everything – his little flag flutters out of the window – inside the sound of children shouting and playing; Hans and Paultje, Saskia and Lidatje – and Jopie Thijm came to play with him. He was so pleased with everything, and so good and sweet. Now he’s sleeping peacefully again. I’m sitting alone in the small drawing room – it’s pleasant in the lamplight – I can feel the fine, special – tenderness of the atmosphere in this little room – there are flowers on the table beside me – a delicate, pinkish tulip, slender on its pale green stem – also strongly scented flowers in a small vase, books on the table – the fairy tale of the ugly duckling – a book by Tolstoy that I once discussed with Theo. The tea set makes everything cosy. Oh if only I had him with me now – beside me on that sofa where we sat together so often – how happy I’d be now. Now I feel so alone, so sad – so far, far away from him.
Oh these dusty sunny summer days, I hate them.
Another year is over – and everything’s the same, the emptiness around me is greater – though it is as if something more powerful is growing up inside me – but sometimes so weak – oh so weak! How long ago was it now, how long – that birthday when our child had yet to be born and we sat together in front of the fire – I had a dress that I’d got for him – on my lap! And now he’s already so big – and so delightfully sweet and good. “I’ll tiptoe quietly to you tomorrow morning,” he said this evening, oh my treasure – my dear. Theo – darling, how much you gave me.
Israëls came to see me today.– At last I have a portrait of the child now – I can’t help thinking about it all the time – it’s wonderful to have it.– The little blue eyes look so serious – he painted him in his red shirt, oh it’s so sweet! 
That afternoon in the studio was wonderful – and today – too – first he looked at the paintings and then we walked together to v. Eeden and he ate with us. I’d like to know what he thought – oh, it’s always the same – they come once and then I never see them again.
Awful lecture by Free v. E. – impossibly boring – how can he do something like that? – and Martha, who listened to it! The room was nice – small, pleasant – an audience of people I knew – but oh, it was so boring. Israëls was there too – I had thought to speak to him, but it was no more than a handshake. How glad I am to be sitting safe and quiet at home now.
Another New Year’s Eve – another year behind me! What a lot of “prose” this year has brought, as Aunt Cornelie would say. Oh, what a lot of tiresome people I’ve had around me – had to listen to so many mean-spirited, nasty things. Have I slipped back myself because of it? Much lower mood, that’s for sure. This evening an hour on my own at last – bliss, bliss. I look back with yearning at those long, quiet evenings last year – alone with my books, with my memories!
The child is delightful – he’s sleeping peacefully in his little bed.– Theo, darling, be with us again this year – your love, your gentleness, your goodness, let them come over us.
I said to the child, laughing: “If you don’t want to come for a walk with me, I shall just take another little boy.” He was sitting on the table in front of me with his little feet in my lap. He shook his head and his blue eyes laughed: “No, no – you won’t do that – I’m your own little boy.” “Why are you my little boy?” “Well, I grew in your tummy,” he said. This morning I was lost in thought: “You mustn’t look like that,” he said. “Like what?” “With those ridges in your forehead.”
I’m afraid – I’m afraid he’s beginning to long for school – twice I’ve heard him say: what shall I do? That’s a bad sign.
Written nothing in eight months! It’s been a time without emotions – everything uniform grey, or however Aletrino would describe it. No, not yet, I’m never like that – there are always flickers of pleasure – I live, if only for a few moments. In January – went to Amsterdam.– I was tired, dead tired – I felt abandoned – lonely, unhappy in the city – amidst all those people – coming from my wonderful quiet in the country. I only felt safe and comfortable in the studio with Israëls – they were wonderful afternoons, lazy I believe – he drew a little portrait of me – crayon – I just sat very still – resting easily and he talked – talked – brought back to me all sorts of thing from the past. It was very pleasant – very good – our feelings – then.– It’s different again, now – we are a little more familiar – I went to see him again in July – he was different then – he shook me awake out of my sad dreaming – my indifference – I want to p. dress a little better – still very, very simply – but there must be something of myself in it. One wonderful evening – the Chat Noir – de Berceuse bleu by Montoya –
They were two lovers
Who dreamt of distant love. 

Fine, clear autumn days – the air so pure, it’s like a magic land in the evenings. In the blue-white moonlight – leaves carpeting the ground – as if it’s covered with silver snow! Wonderfully, wonderfully beautiful.– The child is getting big, and more independent every day – he fills my life more than before because he understands everything better – but less than before because I have less to do to look after him during the day.
It’s the same with me – I’ve been alone very little – so very little myself. In September we had a wonderful few days in The Hague, also paid a visit to old Israëls, oh, so pleasant – he was so friendly, it was definitely a bright spot after a tedious summer.
Later.– And I wrote nothing about that afternoon with Isaac Israëls – it was just an impulse, we played with fire – but there’s no trifling with love. [I am[?]q
a beautiful woman – he pretended he loved me – it was still wonderful. 
Alone, I’m sitting here blissfully quietly alone – it’s melancholy – but I don’t feel unhappy – the child is another year older – stronger, more vigorous and more sensible – I am not a whit the wiser, I fear – oh, that longing for some fullness, richness of love in my life!
Saw two good things on New Year’s Day.– The watercolour by Isaac Israëls at the exhibition in the Kunstkring, a fisherwoman with a child in her arms – splendid – dark blue and red – her clothes and the child’s, the wind that blows and the fresh sea air.r
[pearl grey,] almost no difference between sea and sky – calmly, with a great, stately noise it came rolling in – everything became large and fine in and around me! It was a moment of profound pleasure!
The next afternoon in the studio – oh, that wonderful, friendly – actually bare and empty studio with its memories! He gave me that fine calendar by Nieuwenhuis – we sat together in the chair and played – yes, what we do is really playing together. Then he brought me home – through the silent grey park, with the lights of the city in the distance. I’ve now put an end to the ambiguous nature of our relationship – I don’t want to play with fire any longer. He is not a man for marriage – oh, if I was free and independent – how I would give myself to him – how he would enjoy my beautiful young body – how I would stand free and pure before him – no egoism – no tiresome aftermath of everything – I would want to give him nothing but pleasure – how happy we could be – pleasure is happiness. But I may not, if I did – I would make it impossible to earn for the child – so it’s better that we don’t see each other for the time being.–
He thought so, too – he wrote to me, in reply to mine, one of his short, resolute notes – with the same conclusion: “it’s better that we don’t see each other for the time being”. I was distressed about it at first – I felt as if everything that was good in my life had been taken away – and when I’d put the child to bed in the evening – I fell sobbing on my bed – I couldn’t hold it in any longer.– But he kissed me – and sat up straight in his little bed – crying with such profound sadness: “Mummy, what’s the matter – why are you crying like that?”, that I instantly hid my own grief to comfort him. And the next day I wrote Isaac a chaffing letter – to which he replied – ending: “if I get the chance I will come and visit you again one of these days”. And so now we are in a position of armed peace.
Sunday, a pleasant evening with Bertha Jas, she is good and kind and sensitive – he is just as genuine as she.– They have many beautiful things – and all the books you can think of – home on the tandem in the evening – an adventurous trip through the fog.I’m enjoying a good book – the autobiography of Annie Besant – what a woman.– Good, her living together with Charles Bradlaugh – something like that encourages one in God’s name not to worry about those petty miseries of life. I read something good by Maeterlinck this evening. Every man must find for himself a possibility of superior life in humble and inevitable everyday reality.– Yes, a superior life, cultivate that – that’s what it comes down to – otherwise I’d go under in the stream of banality washing over me.
Went to the churchyard today – it was grey and silent, and large, heavy, mournful raindrops dripped from all the branches.– Could there be anything left of him under those green ivy leaves – is it his dust that feeds these plants – is it a part of his life – that grows there in that vegetation – or is what theosophy says true – that the soul lives on outside the body?– Would he know – how I came to him so full of longing and sorrow.– Darling, darling, don’t think that I shall ever forget you – even though there are sometimes moments when I think I might have new happiness and a new life – you will always live in the depths of my soul; oh, I thank you always for all your love – for all that wealth of tenderness and happiness you gave me.
Another delightful afternoon in the studio, oh, so delightful – at every meeting “we get closer together” – he was so sweet to me yesterday – so friendly.
Another cold Sunday evening! I’m tired, half sick, I’m not working, I don’t know what I want myself. I don’t know what’s right! Sit still, daydreaming or enjoy my freedom – oh, to know what’s right.
I did go – he was glad that I went – it was wonderful – just half an hour perhaps – then we went to the station together.
And after that time – how many more times have I been there – in the evening – when we saw it get dark in the studio – and again in the evening with the moonlight in the garden – and in the afternoon in the new studio – with the view of the Park – oh, so often – so often – and a few times in the evening here – just a few days ago – but oh, it causes doubt and anxiety and trouble in my soul, and my peace and contentment are gone.– What will the new year bring? Or rather what shall I do?
Little Vincent is going to school! When he walks off so pluckily in the morning I’m proud that he’s already such a big boy – and at the same time I’m sad that he’s gone from me like this – child, child in those years of your life you have been your mother’s joy and the light of my eyes – when I think back over these six years here – often so dark and difficult, then it’s his head of golden curls that gave light and lustre to my life – it’s his little voice that was the music in it, it was his blue eyes that always laughed at me so sweetly.– Oh, what will his life be like – my little darling – my sweet, blond child.
He was here again this evening – was it the last time?
No – it was not the end between us – another afternoon at the studio brought us closer together again – and now another period of truce? 
Dearest Theo,
My thoughts were constantly with you on that long, tedious journey, but now I keep wondering: how will he have found his brother, how does he feel right now?' I sincerely hope it's not terribly serious. Do give Vincent my regards, if possible, and tell him I am thinking of you both. I was delighted with the let- ters from your Mother and Willy. I read and re-read them this morning - after all, it was something that came from you! I am so pleased they also approve - I believe I shall grow very fond of Willy.
It would be most selfish to talk about ourselves and our own happiness now, you'll agree, but I do want to tell you that I feel far more at peace, that I have confidence in the future - which is not to say it will bring us happiness alone, but that we will help one another to live our lives well- I promise I shall do my very best!
I am leaving early tomorrow morning - I'd like just to be at home - I'm not really myself here. My cold is still very bad-I shall take care of myself at home and make sure I am well by the time you come. Will it be soon?³ I'm writing in haste be- cause Dries has to take the letters before 5 o'clock-and I'm sit- ting in semi-darkness. I just wanted to say hello and cheer you up, if possible. Please write soon to
your Jo

Dearest Theo,
Father is writing to you and as soon as his letter is finished I intend to slip in a few words of my own-I had so little time this afternoon.' There is babylonian confusion with the letters and addresses-to everyone's indignation I didn't know the I realised you number of your house in Rue Lepic either, so I addressed it to Boulevard M.2 But after my letter had gone would not get it tomorrow, as I would have liked you to, be- cause you presumably don't go to work on Sundays, do you? So which of the two letters will you receive first? Paris seems so far away. It takes so long to hear from one another. Has Dries been to see you? I suppose so. When I said goodbye to Annie we gave each other a kiss and agreed to 'forget and for- give' everything. We shall just carry on as if nothing ever hap- pened - though I still don't really know whether to be amused or annoyed at the thought of the reception she gave us the first time we called on her together.3
I've told our good news to a few close acquaintances. It's strange talking about it-it sounds so banal, two people get- ting engaged - but when other people discuss it, I think: you really have absolutely no idea of what it means to us. We had wonderful times together in those few days, did we not? What I liked most was looking at the paintings - though better still in your room. That's where I usually picture you-it was so peaceful, I felt closer to you than anywhere else. What will it be like when you are here? We'll not be able to share as much as we did in Paris, but you're right: it doesn't matter in the least- it's only for a short while. I love hearing you say I can mean so much to you, it doesn't seem possible. Will you not be disap- pointed in me? There's so much you shall have to teach me.
Does that not put you off? I have great plans to learn housekeeping straight away. It's going to be all right, honestly. And now I'm longing to hear from you again. Good night,
your Jo
New year's eve '88
My dearest Theo,
Perhaps you'll feel I am inundating you with letters, but I cannot let the evening pass without talking to you-without wishing you happiness for the year ahead! It's like wishing happiness upon myself-we're not separable from one anoth- er any more, are we? What are you doing at the moment? Maybe writing to me as well-I do hope so. This evening I re- ceived the kindest letter from your Mother and one from Wil as well. I had written to tell her about Father's letter going astray, because she must have been surprised not to have heard from him.' I understand, too, that you wrote and told them about Vincent's illness. I'm so anxious to know how he is -do you get news every day? What a distressing time for you.
I also wrote to Lize this evening - everyone teases me for spending the whole day writing letters - but I do have to tell our acquaintances our news. There are so many people who look forward to meeting you. Aunt Weissman is here this evening with all the children - I've just slipped away for a mo- ment to wish you a happy new year.-
This will be my last new year's eve at home - I do wish you were here! Good night
your Jo
Dearest Theo,
I have just received your lovely long letter-do you know I had given up all hope of seeing you here on Sunday? What a surprise. I hadn't dared hope it- but not only because I'm pleased about it. I'm sure it's also the most sensible thing to do, providing of course that you can arrange it at work somehow- because then we'll have a chance to discuss everything-with Father and Mother and your Mother - and then, when we're stronger and in better spirits from having spent some time to- gether, we shall be able to get back to work- until we're to- gether for good! As things are now I feel very unsettled.-
I wish I could be with you all this evening. I can picture you quite clearly, you and Spijker on either side of the stove, Annie at the tea tray, Dries holding forth. I've been thinking of you a u all constantly.- I have done nothing in the past few days but read letters and write letters. I have just received very warm con- gratulations from Anne Veth' - one long ode to marriage. She predicts a rosy future for us-and something you wrote has just caught my eye: 'don't expect too much, for illusion is pre- tence. I believe I know what you mean. I don't picture our lives - as Loulou Edmond wrote to Annie - 'comme un paradis ou mes jours s'écoulent dans un bonheur parfait'. Far from it. We shall certainly have lots of problems-even between our- selves, because for years you have been accustomed to so much freedom, living just as you please, and I'm used to an or- dinary, homely sort of life which is certainly very pleasant in many respects, but nevertheless rather insular. So we will both need to change a bit, don't you agree-though I'm sure in small ways only, and if you could just have a little patience with me, I shall do my best to fit in with you. Once we know what it is that we lack, it won't be too hard to fill it in.
Did thinking of me really help when you were feeling so sad? How I wish I could do something for you I'd have been delighted and very proud if Vincent had wanted to be a brother to me as well-if I could have done anything, however small, to make his life more agreeable. I had so much hoped that through you I would come to understand him, from a c of course! But don't abandon all hope. -I keep thinking of the distance little peach tree he painted for me! But were to come here now, wouldn't my cheerfulness strike the wrong chord? No, of course not, we all know how you feel; it's only other family's people, those who don't, and they simply don't matter! And now down to business! I have another name b hanna, a horrid one that I would prefer to forget. So if you have no names other than Theodoor, it will all be quite simple: Engaged. Th.v.G. and J.B. January '89 Paris/Amsterd. But they do have to give the date of the reception and that, of course, de- pends on you. If you come on Saturday evening, we shan't be able to receive people the very next Sunday- but waiting a whole week would also be absurd. Would it be all right to do it on Wednesday, or would you rather wait until Sunday a week? Neither do I know how long you will stay-if you are only stay- ing for eight days, I wouldn't want the last day to be tiring and difficult for you, so Wednesday would be quite suitable. I don't need to give you our address and number, do I? I'm glad you finally received Father's letter. Let me know whether it's better to address my letters to you at home or at the Boulevard - at home you only get them late in the evening, don't you?
Oh yes, Lien' has already drawn up a list for me and I have about 125 announcements to send. I'm letting you know how many because it wouldn't be easy to get more of them from Paris, and I remember that D & A ran short.
I was so used to retiring early in Paris that I get terribly tired if I stay up late in the evening-it's half past eleven now but I must send this letter, dull and sleepy as it is. I'm much better, just a fit of coughing now and then-everyone says I look far better than when I left. I'm saving all my strength for when you are here and only paid 2 calls yesterday. I hope to speak to your Mother and Wil tomorrow. Good night, your sleepy
Jo
How is your friend de Haan? Have you read any of the Carlyle yet?
Sunday evening
My dearest Theo,
 As I sit here so quietly in my usual pleasant surroundings, that wretched train is taking you further away from me by the minute; it's so empty now, so quiet, and you've only been gone for a couple of hours-how long the months will be!' I have your portrait before me. If I look at it for a while it seems al most as if you yourself were watching me, and the words couldn't find this afternoon rise to my lips: - thank you for all the joy you have given me, for all the love you show me, I feel so fortunate, so happy. You have no idea what a have already made to my life, how aware I have become of its pointlessness, banality, how you have inspired me to some- thing higher and better-you did so much for me in just that one week. I'm quite sure that if I stay with you always, you might still be able to make something out of me. I had wanted to tell you this and far more before you left this afternoon, but I couldn't bring myself to-however, I can say it to your portrait. I have a feeling that you are thinking of me now; I wish I were sitting beside you in a corner of the carriage, as I did on Friday evening on our way from The Hague. But by the time you receive my letter you'll be back in your usual routine - you'll have worked the whole day, spent another quiet evening at home with all your paintings around you-do you still remember there's a Jo? Look at the inside of your ring so you forget. My ring and the portrait are a comfort to me-indeed, don't you're quite right-it's absurd for us to be separated again, we had only just found each other-I hate being without you.- But I mustn't complain and be ungrateful, some wait a long time-I shall just be very industrious-for then time will pass quickest! And when you get back you will find a g housekeeper instead of clumsy Jo. And now I want to ask you people have to something else, which is truly not just out of curiosity-but l worry that if there were keep it to yourself? You've told me anything troubling you, you a good most recent letters-is anything wrong? If you'd rather not tell would nothing about Vincent's difference you needn't, of course-But I should so like to be your confidante, even in your sadness, don't keep it from me.' In the past wonderful week, I have thought far too much about myself and too little about him-do you think he'll ever grow to like me? And now my dearest, dearest Theo, I wish you good night with an affectionate kiss-it's half past ten, what a time you have ahead. Dream of me, at least if you can get to sleep, good night my dearest,
your Jo
Dearest Theo,
How slowly time goes by-the three days I've not seen you feel like three weeks-do you also find it so s you had a good journey-I was O strange? I am glad delighted with your letter time and again I re-read your words 'you would make me as happy as ever I wished to be'. If that's really from your face that you are content with me, that I am what you expected - then I shall have nothing more to wish for either. You have no idea how you have changed my life--I was in danger of getting into a rut-though something in me fighting against it - with your help I have nothing to fear. Today I was out with your Mother all day; I was very pleased, kept true, if I can see since Wil is not here, to be able to take her place for once.' We had coffee in Van Woustraat, where I met Bertha again-then called on the Genkama Bakker family.3 Mrs Bakker said she used to know you well and asked me to send her regards. She al- so told me that young Pierson from Paris had introduced his girl to her - did you know he was engaged - do you know him well?4 After that we went to Mrs Toussaint, who told me a lot about you. She said she had once been on a lovely carriage ride through Paris with you and her two daughters, and that she had written to you afterwards, at New Year, to thank again, and had you received that letter? You might think- couldn't care about all these strange people - but I was pleased you once to start feeling more at home in the world of your acquaintances and relatives. It will be far nicer in the future if I also know something about it. Kee Vos invited me to dine with them on Monday - I'm glad - Kee is most kind. Last night I wrote a few words to Vincent-just a few lines to thank him for his good wishes. I should have liked to do it quite differently and been a bit more frank-but that's how the words came out. I feel so small when I think of him-completely insignificant.'/ received very kind letters from Wil and Lies- the patient w not as bad as Wil had expected - but she was anyway. I'm dreadfully sorry she's not here a was glad she had gone any more.. I had so much wanted to talk to her, about you in the first place, and get to know her better. What struck me most about her are her eyes and her voice-but the latter is typical of the whole family. Everyone loves your portrait-your Mother says you look as if you are trying to fathom someone out, and each time I look at it I imagine that someone is me!
Oh yes, I have discovered that we have a whole lot of things for our home-a couple of blue Japanese vases (very ugly), a couple of majolica vases, a fan to hold pictures - all gifts I received in my school teaching career-but which I had forgot- ten altogether. Mother has given me 12 silver teaspoons and a pair of sugar tongs-still from grandmother's house-see how fortunate we are. The more I see the vases we bought in The Hague the more I like them-but I'm going to put them away so they don't break. I look forward to hearing what you  thought of Breg Nederhasselt. I used to be extremely fond of her, but she has changed a lot! Will there be a letter from you tomorrow? Do you sometimes wonder on your way home 'will there be one for me' - I do all the time.-Have I bored you terribly this evening? I shall write something better as soon as I can be more sensible.- Good night-an affectionate kiss from
your Jo
Dearest Theo. You'll think it very banal but I am going t words about the weather; I simply have to tell you how beautifully sunny it is this morning and how bright blue the sky. It's almost like spring out-I can breathe again after all the bitterly cold days we've had-it was so bad I was reluctant to go out- doors. So I've not been to the photographer, but I shall go afternoon-(see how selfish I am-I thought: I've got a portrait, so the others can wait-wicked of me, isn't it). I had been waiting for a letter from you and when I found one in the letter box addressed to Father-knowing there would be something for me inside, I opened it and took my part-(I should mention that we are allowed to open any letters from Paris, and though this is really meant for correspondence from Dries, I applied it to yours as well). Of course, I did not read Father's letter until he gave it to me himself-so if you have any secrets to share with Father, you can rest assured that I shan't read anything that is not intended for me. to start with a few
Oh, please tell me about yourself around the time you had this portrait made! It's not you - when I put it before me, you look straight past me like a stranger, your expression is so cool and unfamiliar. I like the last one a hundred thousand times more – but then the other one must surely have been taken a long time ago?
 I spent the whole day yesterday tidying my desk and my -you know I've always been fanatical about keeping letters of any interest to me, but now I must finally start disposing of them. It was a funny mixture-letters I received in London, all sorts from the Elburg period' - letters from the children when I was back in A, Anne Dirks pouring her heart out when she was engaged-and from Dries, too, just a couple mentioning you-about the time the two of you went woods in a downpour, relieved that neither of you were mar- ried because your wives would have been cross if you’d taken them out in such dire weather. And then the letter saying the two of you were coming to Holland - a day in Rijssel and a cou- ple of days in Antwerp-I remember it all so well. I also re- read your letters from '87-and now I understand them so much better. Theo, you once wrote 'tell me if there are clouds gathering above & you are not content, I shall try to help'. Well, as a matter of fact, at the moment there is just one thing that keeps nagging at me, that haunts my conscience and I can- not shake it off: why was I so blind to my own happiness, so silly, so foolish, so unkind to you, when I actually meant to be honest. What misery I brought upon myself-but experience is the best teacher-after all, it was good for me. If you would say you forgive me, I shall never never mention it again, and per- haps this nasty feeling will vanish."
How I should love to have been present at that discussion in your room on Tuesday evening, saying nothing, just sitting and listening!' In the old days, when I still used to think about all sorts of issues and express opinions on them, even the most complicated matters and things way beyond my grasp, I had great faith in 'progress' and believed that one day people would be far happier, far better, far more advanced than they are now. But I've changed my mind- I believe that each person faces the same struggle, a thousand years ago or a thousand hence - no matter whether circumstances and outside influences change our innermost self remains the same- and humanity as a whole only benefits when each of us tries to do good in our own, small circle. I once used to think this too petty, but now that I am starting to understand what it really means, I quail at the responsibility it imposes on us and am ashamed to realise what a long way I still have to go. I mention this in connection with what you wrote about Vincent. In fact it is our duty to help those around us - as he does or at least tries to do- but in the eyes of the world it is surprisingly impractical - why is it made so difficult for us to do good?
But now there is the joy of knowing that the two of us will help each other, that I shall no longer need to cast about aimlessly for something useful to do, as my duty is plain and clear- I'm reading my Carlyle again-so I am going to end off, leaving you to make sense out of these scribblings by the scatterbrain you want for a wife! But first I must tell you that cards and letters are to arrive, some for you as well-another three yesterday with a crown at the top, from 'de Jonge van Zwijnsbergen' and a postcard from Mr van Lakerveld of Helmond. I'll send them to you if you want, but it didn't seem worthwhile. And tomorrow you're off house hunting-poor Theo, some chore. Don't make things too difficult-I shall be satisfied and happy wherever you take me, no matter if it's dark or high or small-you do know that, don't you? I simply wanted to say so. And when I think of Dries fretting about money, I believe we would do well to spend very little on rent. I'm so sorry my poor boy has troubles, but he'll cope. All he lacks is willpower - it is nurtured best by misfortune-as long as it's not getting him down, but I'm sure it's not! I shall go over to your Mother's in a while to see if she might care to go fora stroll- and now I really shall end off. A kiss from your loving
Jo 
This morning I wrote you a long letter, which Wim was to post for me, but he has just come in, completely distraught, to say that he lost it. Someone may have posted it-so should you receive it tomorrow, please let me know, by postcard if need be, so I can stop worrying.
Yours Jo 
My dearest Theo,
I am so pleased that the letter has been found. It's appalling to think of a stranger reading something that was intended for we mustn't think about that. Thank y for letting me know so quickly-I feel so fortunate with three your eyes only-but letters in front of me, 19, 20, 21 Jan. I wish you would keep it up. you I love hearing about the things you do and how you feel, so that I can share it all with you from a distance - we're so terribly far apart! Perhaps you would like to hear the same from me-w the days go by quietly and monotonously-or rather, I don't -well, enjoy all the little things that used to 'distract' me, as they say. Softly and imperceptibly the ties that bound me to my old life here are loosening, and I mostly live in the future. Byron's words, 'Our life is twofold',' keep coming to mind today- though for me the second is not the world of dreams that he meant - I mean the same thing you wrote about - our inner life- and alongside it the prosaic domestic routines and vexations that lay claim to the other half of our lives, and we forget them for a while and then all of a sudden they pop up again. For you it's mainly house hunting-poor dear - that's what you get for wanting a wife-50 apartments in just one Sunday – that's frightful. For me, it's everyone nattering and nagging all day long about everything I must do and mustn't do. Even our dusters etc are the subject of earnest debate - whether they should be marked with your name only or whether there should also be a B! It's sometimes too much for me and I get cross-then I go upstairs, read you letters again and think: leave them be. When we're together we'll find a way to combine the prosaic with the poetic, don't you agree? I enjoyed myself at Stricker's yesterday. I love hearing your Mother and her sister talk about the old days with such enthusiasm and good cheer. It does one good to hear it-one ask if they had a happy marriage. Shall we be as content will one another when we're old? Kee told me about her husband for the first time and read me a letter from her son- it was after dinner when we were sitting by the fire, just an hour for a heart-to-heart chat. Cousin Jan was very friendly and, to my edification, he announced at table that Breitner couldn't draw and that De Haan's painting (he'd heard from a reliable source) was quite ugly!5 Thank on my behalf for his 'rough sketch'. I'm delighted with it. What's my name doing there along with apartments and coffee and cokes-is that what was on your mind?' I went to the photographer yesterday morning and, without my asking, he offered to let me pose again, which I shall do just as soon as I have had my hair cut. But what shall I order of yours? 6 large ones cost f 14. If you take three they cost and if you order only a dozen small ones for f 7.50 you still have to pay f7.50 for that one proof of the large size. Would it not be best just to take 6 large ones? - Thank you so much for the book. I'm looking forward to it and it's precisely the type of reading matter I can enjoy at the moment. I'm not up to anything too complicated these days. At the moment we have a Nieuwe Gids - an article by Van Deijssel on Le rêve - and very nice book reviews by Verwey. That's all I have read so far.? Were you also so impressed with Zola's latest book? To me he is still an unknown quantity, although I have managed to form a very vague impression by reading a lot about him as well as a few fragments of his own work of course.-
My second half, the prosaic part, refuses to be silenced this evening-wouldn't the apartment for f' 850 be perfectly suit- able? It is certainly big enough and I should be very pleased in- deed if we didn't need to live out of town." So far away. I have of been making some calculations of my own, but don't you think that if you were to dine out at lunchtime and have a season tick et for the train, this would add so much to the rent that we might just as well live in town? This afternoon Mrs Sethe was telling me that her brother's has a large apartment at 73 Boulevard Voltaire (he's married with 2 children) for 550 francs. Is it an unpleasant neighbourhood, why would it be so looked it up on the map, but of course I'm none the wiser. cheap?
Tomorrow I am going shopping with your Mother, some thing tells me your name might crop up! I'm enclosing a letter from her and wish you good night."4 I think of you constantly and wish you were here - a kiss from
your Jo.
Write soon, will you? Everyone sends their regards. We've had no word from Dries-goodbye dearest.
My very dearest Theo
At last I've found paper that won't be full when I've only just started writing. I had thought that for once I would have a nice, long chat with you this evening-but what do you know, it's al ready 10 o'clock, so I shall have to hurry again if I want my letter to go this evening! First of all, thank you very much for sending your letter'-you had often talked about him, about how much you me loved him-but now I know what you mean and realise what an influence he must have had on your life-it reflects such a noble, lofty spirit-no, once again of course, I can't express what felt-but after his letter I'm longing him and love him, and I can now even more to get to know wholeheartedly endorse something you once wrote to me when he was ill: 'whether near or far may he remain the same advisor and brother to both of us'.' If we were ever unable to keep our 'second' life going, a letter like that from him would certainly do it, don't you agree?³ His wistful tone made me so sad - don't you also some- times have a sudden overwhelming desire to do something kind for someone? That's what I felt when reading his letter- shall I ever be able to do anything for him when we are married? I'm afraid he'll see me as a nuisance - even now, he thinks that when I'm there, there'll not be room in your apartment for all his paintings. Write and tell him your little wife will take up hardly any space and everything will be just the same as be- fore, will it not? At least I can offer a helping hand in his match making plans for Wil you know, all women are matchmakers at heart! Vincent's
Yesterday evening I called on Lida Dirks and we played Beethoven's 5th symphony together. Actually she'd invited Mien but she had a bad headache so I went in her place. Poor though our performance was, we enjoyed ourselves anyway. Afterwards, of course, a chat about housekeeping, and I left with a large kitchen book under my arm instead of the symphonies I had arrived with. I use an old exercise book for recipes, which has an essay on 'critique' on one side, starting with Aristotle and then, via Shakespeare, ending up with Lessing!' So if I get bored with one, I can read the other. You can't imagine how difficult I find housekeeping sometimes - will you truly not mind if things don't go well at first? And yet you are far more entitled to it than I am to expect you- as you put it -to make my life 'rich and full'. If I can't do that myself, I wouldn't deserve to have anyone else do it for me. But every- one feels down in the dumps from time to time, and when that happens we shall help one another-wasn't it Goethe who said. I believe I have never heard anything truer than those words. Still, it's good to be given some encouragement now and then! One thing I do want is to regain my strength. I don't know whether you have ever felt physically weak- it has caused me endless suffering and I still experience it from time to time. I lose all interest and energy and resilience, and am left with nothing but a feeling of terrible im- potence. But in time it will disappear completely.⁹
What a wonderful surprise to get a letter from you every day -you truly deserved a compliment right at the beginning-I am delighted about it. Of course I don't mind your roundabout at- tempt to find out whether I would prefer to live out of town or in town-but dearest why did you not ask me outright? I was rather astonished that you were even considering it at this stage. In future I shall see a catch in every question and read something different into everything you say - so be warned!
All this hunting is horrid for you- from what you've told me, the place near rue Chaptal for f' 850 still seems the best, even if the neighbourhood and staircase aren't wonderful. The apartment itself is the main thing after all, and in the mornings you would be close by and not have to leave so early and, on top of that, the rent is quite suitable. Don't you think it has a lot going for it? Yes, it will indeed be splendid when that's settled. Before that we can't do anything about furniture and things, not until we know how much space we will have. Would it not be nicest to use the money your Mother wants to give us to buy something together here? I wouldn't know what to choose at the moment. Do you know, on Wednesday afternoon when we went shopping together, your Mother surprised me with a charming little frame for your portrait-it was so kind of her, now I can keep you on the table beside me all the time. The portrait De Haan made is hanging in our bedroom above the bed, so I can see you first thing every morning. I think I shall go to pose for Woodbury on Sunday morning, so you shall have it the following week, but it's bound to be frightful again.-
I believe I once saw Veth's etching in an exhibition here and liked it very much. All I remember of Redon's works are a few impossibly bizarre pictures - I have to end off, as they're call- ing me downstairs. Henri went to the Wagner concert this evening, so I was able to sit and write in his room without being disturbed - he has just come home with Willem and they are waiting for me for supper. I am ashamed at the way I have scribbled this evening, but it was all such a rush on Sunday I am going to take all the time I need to write to you-so, until the day after tomorrow
your loving Jo
Regards from your Mother, I paid her a quick visit this after- noon- and from everyone here. Have I thanked you for your letter on behalf of Father and Mother (for the time being)? I think I forgot-goodnight and a kiss.
But, as you say, he is not someone one can build on-he leaves you no peace and quiet for yourself-there's something out of balance in him, which is why he made himself so deeply unhappy-he must have suffered terribly in his life-but it's good to know he had his Mathilde at his side in the years he needed her most. I recall a study by Huet on Heine, but it is too long to write it all down. I shall show it to you one day What has made you so distrustful of people? Have they hurt you so much? I believe that au fond everyone really wants to be nice, though circumstances may often stand in their way-and that we ought to sympathise with those who are not, rather than hate them. Perhaps I'm inclined to be everyone's friend, but I find most people have something that attracts me.-
What would your day be like? Hen and I are just going to call on Sijthoff and then visit your uncle on the Keizersgracht. Tomorrow your Mother's coming to eat with us, and Mrs Strick- er and Kee are coming to tea in the evening, pleasant, don't you agree? If only you were here too. It's beautifully sunny feels like a real Sunday. Did the letter from V get right? I'm so glad you let me read it, though of course I didn't and understand much about your business affairs and paintings. get to you shall be more careful about writing this week. With a kiss all
your Jo
My dearest Theo, to have a few words with you, when the wonderful letter you wrote on Sunday arrived-I am going to I was just intending - first I must write to you. What dine at cousin Bec's' this afternoon but the dear soul will sim- ply have to wait a bit for me- splendid news that your aunt wants to give us the piano, and how well your Mother organised it for us - so she was very glad to hear about it. We had a most pleasant day yesterday, talked nineteen to the dozen and played some music in the evening (there was no escaping for me either). It had crossed my mind that my family mightn't really take to your aunt Stricker-they would to Kee, of course - but in fact they agreed that they al thought so highly of her!' I found only your uncle at home at the Keizersgracht on Sunday afternoon and spent half an hour chatting to him; he was very cordial but spoke all about paintings (mentioning, for one thing, that the museum had bought one by Blommers) which made me giggle dreadfully-it made me feel so grand! He simply could not understand why you hadn't rented the apartment for f' 1400, the one you had told him about+- rather foolish, don't you agree, not to grasp that it's too expensive.
From what you told me I have mixed feelings about the Rue Rodier apartment. That au ret made me jump with joy, on top of which it's close to the Boulevard - but only one room for the salon and salle à manger is horrid, don't you think; wouldn't a pitch-dark kitchen be better and couldn't we have the walls papered ourselves? Of course, you can judge better than I-I've not seen it, so do whatever you consider best.-Don't think I'm fretting about the housekeeping, but I do wish I were as robust and strong as I used to be so that I could accomplish whatever! want! Do you know what I've done - I take gymnastic lessons for an hour every day. Dries always used to say it was the only thing that would do me good-so now I am giving it do seem to be seeing a lot of them. Is Annie still being pleasant? I don't entirely agree with what you wrote about Dries but I haven't time to go into detail now. What do you mean by an aristocratic view of life? Don't you think it a shame that the house in Leiderdorp has been rented to someone else?? I feel especially sorry for Wil. I believe your Mother will resign herself to staying in Breda; she's leaving tomorrow. I expect to see her at the station and then we shall say goodbye until after Mother's birthday.
I had my portrait taken this morning. The photographer said it was 'vollkommen" as far as both my costume and ex- pression are concerned - but I would be so bold as to doubt his words - I was wearing an old, dark-blue frock that suits me very well, but there's so little that goes with it. I'll get it on Fri- day or Saturday and will send it to you at once. I'm returning your aunt's letter with mine. We thought you might need it to reply to her, as it's bristling with questions. Is she not a little 10 tiresome - that's the impression I got from her letter. I really must go, though I'd like to talk to you a bit longer. Your letter did me a power of good - many thanks dearest (I'm glad you've stopped coughing in the mornings). I have also been all right lately as long as I don't tire myself out. Are you not irritated by my slapdash letters? I'm forever in a rush, and now especially most dissatisfied with my scribble, but so be it, it has to go. Goodbye, my dearest, a kiss from
your Jo
Dearest Theo,
Yesterday morning I received your letter with the ground plan and studied it diligently, but the conclusion I have reached is-that I've actually no opinion about it.' If it struck you as being pleasant, I should take it- of course it would have been nicer to have a guest room but that's no reason not to take it- we can always work something out. Having read all you’ve written about apartments, I still consider the one au 3e near Rue Chaptal also for f' 850 very acceptable-but you apparently have something against it-if course, I can't really say. I shall be very glad when it's settled, won't you? Then we'll be able to write a bit more about the things we really want to. Now there's always the thought, after a brief digression, oh yes, a few words about apartments! And all that looking around must be so tedious for you. 
It's a boring, rainy day today-everything looks gloomy and dismal-really a day to spend quietly at home, working hard- or reading. The old Gids published a causerie by V. Hamel about a soirée at the Comtesse Diane. And who is she? The author of Maximes and le livre d'or;³ he quoted the nicest pas- sages-especially from the latter book - it made me very curious to know more about it.
I had to stop writing as I had to go to gymnastics-I enjoy it and it does me good-if only I had done it sooner. Waiting for me at home was Mrs Sethe, who gave me a cookery lesson, and next Wednesday I am going to spend the whole day cooking with her - now it will be all right.- Your Mother left yesterday. Kee and I went to see her off on the train, in good spirits as usual. It's strange not even being able to visit her. I shall enjoy being with her in Breda.
Will I ever learn to see what you see in paintings-I love the way you talk about them, like that painting by Gauguin, but I'm not in the mood to concentrate on anything today. I am the very soul of domesticity-guess what we're getting from Henri-I can choose between a silver soup spoon or a bouilloir. Do you mind either way? Now, dearest, Lies is waiting for me to go shopping, so I shall end with a kiss from your Jo
Dearest The
I'm finally going to take the time to sit down and write to you, so I hope this won't be such a dreadful scribble as last time. First I must just tell you I've been very good and written an epistle to aunt Cornelie; I shall enclose it with your letter if can find a big enough envelope- or else I shall just send it off. Of course it doesn't say anything in particular.-I think all your gadding about disgraceful - evenings soirées, dinners in Passy-if you keep this out with the boys, I shall be sitting all alone night after night, poor little me; shall take revenge now by going to stay with friends for a very long time. In fact, I should be surprised if I were back by April! when we're mar
The evening before last Annie Dirks suddenly turned up to enquire when I would be calling on her (imagine, I hadn't even written to her after our visit to them). So I shall go lunch this afternoon and will probably be back at about 4 o'clock on Monday afternoon. Perhaps I will find an hour to talk to you - so don't be astonished if you get a letter from me from Bussum. I shall enjoy being with An again. We've got a lot to chat about and Jan will probably have to flee to the Marken house, which has been put up in the garden at last. They are absolutely delighted with it-there's even a little goat shed-goat's milk will be the drink at the Veth residence- they're really going to play the landed gentry! before
Are the Van Praags going to live in the countryside permanently or is it just for the summer? Please remember to give Clara my warmest regards too-I'm sure I shall really enjoy talking to her and reminiscing about the good old days when we were at school with Miss Theunisse-I was only there for a year, but it was the nicest of all my school days. Never have l been as spoilt as I was there. Do you know, at first I had absolutely no recollection of what Clara looked like-I remember now, though not very well. The evening that Anna called on us Beb went to the students' ball, which lasted until half past five. You can't imagine how much I enjoyed helping her dress, and then finally seeing her drive off in all her glory with a radiant little face-filled with excitement, yet a little anxious 'will I get to dance?' She went with Dries Weissman and Jeannette. It was Dries's first big ball-funny to see him with that blushing, boyish face in formal tails and white tie-they really made a lovely couple. It's been more than a year since I last went to a ball. I no longer think of ball gowns - but of a wedding dress - which is a different matter altogether! Though to tell you the truth it's not the dress I think about.
Last night Wim dreamt that we had a little hut built in Katwijk. How would that appeal to you? As you see, I've inevitably got round to the subject of apartments again. Henri asked me to compliment you on his behalf for the architectural skill you displayed in drawing the ground plan. Theo, I truly still like the one in Cité Pigalle the best. After all, we shan't be taking up residence on the staircase or in the kitchen, and as long as the rooms are pleasant, what more could we want. That one little cabinet de toilette or guest room makes all the difference, don't you think, and then it's not so very high, and close to your work. And whenever we feel like seeing an attractive porte cochère' we'll just pop round to Dries. If you'll allow me to give you a piece of advice, I should take one of those two - whichever you think best - and you're never to say I thought you made the wrong choice - for I shall never ever do so.' I absolutely agree it could go before our very eyes if you leave it too long, the way it did with your Mother. I'm afraid it won't be easy to find anything they like in Leiden - at least not in time to move in the spring-it's such a shame for Wil.
The needlework is coming along wonderfully - mainly in Lien's hands! I don't know whether you're interested in table cloths and napkins-(of course not)-but they're so dainty, with a border of ivy leaves, I chose them myself. It's odd to think this is all for me. When I'm looking around the shop or placing an order I always start off by putting on airs, as if I've been married for years and do this day in and day out-but it gradually becomes obvious that the assistant is amused, that she has seen through me and knows I'm not accustomed to it at all, and I feel smaller and smaller and frightfully embarrassed, until we both end up in fits of laughter.-
I'm sure I shall take to that old Mr Pissaro, notwithstanding his pipes. I wholeheartedly agree with him that capital should be abolished. I must tell you that I have always been keenly interested in finding a solution to the social question (that's what it's called, is it not?). I well remember how, even as a child, I was plagued by this feeling of injustice towards the poor, and how I would keep asking Father what could be done about it. I used to think Father knew everything. Afterwards I began to have doubts, about that as well, and Father's sermons about the small things we could do in our own lives were too narrow- minded, to my way of thinking. A major revolution, that would put everything right- and now I have put this issue on the shelf for a while, along with so many other unresolved questions. Yet I do still enjoy discussing it.
My gymnastics teacher and I have long discussions about politics - she is especially interested in Boulanger (I do believe you're secretly amused by my gymnastics - I love it- for so long I've felt I had nothing but a head- a very tired one some- times - that I enjoy being aware of having other limbs as well, stretching tightly and moving and warming up-girls should do it far more. Our upbringing is so terribly one-sided).
The portrait has not yet come, although he promised it. If it's frightfully ugly, would you mind if I kept it myself? What are you doing tomorrow? I'm glad you're not on your own too much-doesn't time drag? I do wish you were here. Am I truly
your sunshine?
'No letter from Bussum, after all you will think, but honestly, Theo, I simply hadn't a chance to write.' Now I'm back home, relaxed and well, and I've come to have a few words with you straight away. I only received your letter of Friday evening when I got home yesterday afternoon at 5 o'clock-how long it took! I shall send my portrait together with this-it's far from 'vollkommen',' indeed even quite ugly-I've finally managed says: to discover the reason. If a photographer like that look cheerful, the best I can do is try to coax my mouth into a smile- though I can't quite manage a proper smile it makes my mouth impossibly big. If I ever have another one taken, I would rather look deadly earnest. Write and let me know whether you think I should have them made.
I'm dying to hear what you've decided about the apartment -you know, there were two things in your last letter that made me almost angry-how could you say that about being 'cross with me for coming back to this so often'? Is it not you who are encumbered with all that hunting? If only for that reason, I shall be very glad when it's all arranged. But why would I be annoyed? On the contrary-you said you 'appreciate' my learning to cook-so I may certainly 'appreciate' the trouble you've been taking to find a place that I will like too. Shouldn't we rather stop being grateful and simply take these things for granted?
I wish you had been with me in Bussum-it was gorgeous on the heath on Sunday afternoon-the three of us went for a long walk, and on Monday Anne and I went to the pine woods on our own. I enjoyed it more than I can say, in spite of the biting wind and occasional hailstorm. The sky was so beautiful- blue-grey clouds that looked so ominous and then the sun suddenly breaking through-the light and shadows on the tree trunks, and the warm, dark green of the pines - that wonderful silence outdoors-we poor townsfolk are actually to be pitied
for having so little opportunity to enjoy it all. If ever anyone belonged in the surroundings in which cir-
My very dearest Theo,
I have the same problem with writing as you-when I really feel like it and I'm in the right mood, I have to go out or people call and make it impossible - and then finally when it's almost time for the post to go, I get down to it coute qui coûte' and dash something off-well, you know the result! I am so angry this morning and so tired. It has been frightfully busy here at home the past few days, and I'm not up to it. I spent the whole of Wednesday at Mrs Sethe's-yesterday a birthday at aunt Weissman's-called on Lena Weissenbruch Mrs Dusseau (do you remember the dear old lady who was the first to arrive at the reception? she asked me to send you her regards) came to us for coffee and Lida Dirks and her husband came in the evening, and stayed so late that I was still half asleep this morning. Fortunately, your letter arrived yesterday evening³- they don't normally come in the evening so it was a lovely surprise. It feels like ages since I wrote to you-we haven't even talked about our home yet! I am overjoyed that you have rented it - and how well everything has worked out. I've shown everyone who was interested where we're going to live on the map. I've got lots of ideas about what it will look like-if you can, write and tell me more about it. What is a cité actually?" I haven't a clue. But what it looks like on the outside doesn't really matter - it will be lovely inside, don't you agree? Although I don't really trust that double lock on the door-naughty man, already threatening to lock me up and then saying he's not a tyrant! And then you still expect me to come to you? I'm not sure I dare, if you're such a Bluebeard.
I've not even thanked you for 'le livre d'or'-how very sweet of you!" It's a lovely book, but some of those answers are so witty and sur- prising - des petits papiers must be a nice game.' 
It is indeed a trifle commonplace, but the two of us will certainly seek hard. I'm just going to answer your questions. I simply cannot remember who that other painting Millet talked about was by- but he thought it far inferior to the Poussin-it sought achieve an effect, dramatic, people on a roof or in a tree, I believe, in any event a single scene from the Flood, whereas Poussin gave an impression of it as a whole. Whether I can follow your letters? Yes always-whether I think them slapdash- mine are far worse. I'm glad you also love the outdoors so much-we shall really enjoy the summer. Does Dries say it's too expensive? Then we shall be thriftier with other things.
We've heard nothing from Dries since Father's birthday, I keep meaning to write to him but never have the time. Would you greet him for me when you see him, and tell him I think of him often, even though I've not written. He was so kind to me when I was with him! What news have you had from Vincent? I received a lovely letter from Lies yesterday.' Her mistress is still very poorly and of course she misses Wil badly.
And now, last not least, your exhibition! I do wish I could come and see it, it must be beautiful. I remember two of Monet's paintings perfectly well-that were hanging at your place at the time. Will you write and tell me everything? I do hope it will all be to your satisfaction. Another cookery lesson today from Mrs Sethe (what a prosaic person I am-switching from Monet to cookery, is it not dreadful?) The weather is dull, bitterly cold, rainy, everything nasty - I myself have cheered up immensely from writing. Goodbye dearest
your topsy turvy Jo.
I shall have another portrait taken as soon as I can!
happy together not only at the beginning-but that the longer we're together the better it will be- and that I shall feel I really matter to you. As I told you, I called on Mrs Sethe on Friday. We always talk about Paris, which I love, but she and her husband have such an unhappy relationship that it's often embarrassing to be there. And she postulates theories like: oh yes, when you're newly married your husband does everything to please you but that soon changes, and horrid things like that. But they simply don't understand one another-more often than not they're both right, but nothing is plain and straight- forward between them-I can't imagine anything like that. How I wish you were with me - I always do, but sometimes the feeling wells up and is stronger than usual - I feel so terribly alone today. And this evening we're receiving visitors again! Lena and Frits Weissenbruch and Jan v. Velzen.³ I enjoy it when we all sing together, but I don't feel like talking today. Father told me he had written to your Mother and Father to his future son-in-law - what a lot of correspondence there's going to be between Paris and Amsterdam. Some time ago you once said you were worried about me having to leave so much behind that I would miss!" I didn't reply to that because I didn't know what to say to reassure you. Of course I shall think of home and everyone here, and per- haps I shall miss them very much indeed. Imagine the very worst. I do, too, but then remember: we love one another so much and are so happy - I make her so happy that nothing else can compare. Do you love me enough to think that?
I hope to hear from you this evening. I love getting your letters - do you also look forward to them so much? But I can only write about very ordinary things-I've hidden my thoughts and feelings away for so long that I no longer know what they are, or rather, I can't express them in writing any more. They're still there, but they're buried deep down inside. I believe I have never written an intelligent word to you- but one day, when we can talk, I shall do better.
Le livre d'or is wonderfully amusing-it's full of nice things - what do you think of this? I'm going to post my letter myself- what are you doing today-have many people been to admire Monet? 
yet why shouldn't it? We don't need much to be happy-the two of us together in our little home and no tiresome people to bother us. We might bother one another at times, but that's a different matter-because it's bound to happen of course.-
I had a very pleasant hour yesterday. I should mention that I wasn't very well and was lying in bed when Kee Vos dropped by- I heard it was she and asked her to come to see me up- stairs. She spent a good half hour with me and was so kind and warm, and said she felt as if she had known me for years. She told me about her husband and how happy they had been together and that she still thinks about him all, all the time. She didn't complain and wasn't bitter, on the contrary, she was quite cheerful, in fact, and when she left I had tears in my eyes, though I also felt the world was not so bad and people were good after all. I believe it is precisely the opposite of what you feel after talking to Annie.
On Friday I'm dining at Mrs Stricker's - we'll talk about you again and I shall hear about the old days - splendid! Thursday to Mrs Sethe again, she teaches me all sorts of things but the evenings are dull-still, it's kind of her.3 On Sunday Beb sang beautifully, this evening Jo Weissman is here-music again and I'm sitting here at the back and I read your letter once more before starting to write. I was delighted with it this afternoon.
Which Monet painting did you have in the window? One with dark blue water? Is that the one you were describing? It's the one that came to mind when I read your letter.
Yesterday Lies gave me a beautiful hand-made cloth - it was very kind of her. I must go to bed so I shall say goodnight. I just wanted to talk to you for a little while. Don't give up hope and don't worry too much, dearest. Write soon if you can
to your Jo
I shall enclose the letter Lize sent you, but the number was wrong so it was sent back-so she did write at the time after all!
My very dearest Theo, I had wanted to wait before writing until I heard more about
Vincent but that would only have been tomorrow morning, because I'm going out today, as you know, so just a quick word now!' In the first place 'the difficult matter' - don't delude yourself that I have no opinion on a subject as important as the arrangement of the furniture-ten opinions for that matter- but fortunately the same as yours! Let's put the cupboard rather than the buffet in the dining room because even if there were room for a second piece of furniture, I imagine a modern buffet wouldn't go well with that cupboard. If there's not enough space, perhaps there could be a cupboard near the kitchen to store the dinner service - (I'm looking forward to the plan you promised). I believe it would be best to use the guest room for ourselves for the time being and then empty it out if we need it- but of course it very much depends on whether there are cupboards in the apartment. I'm so glad it's being done up nicely-now that you've told me about the hors- es above the entrance I imagine it all to be rather grand. I do so look forward to seeing it! -
I also received a very lovely letter from your Mother, telling me about the gift from Mr and Mrs van Hove, nice of them, is it not? What do you think of using it to buy a tea set, that would be roughly the price? I wish I could think of something of use to you- but only these household things come to mind. I can't help it, Theo, but sometimes I imagine you must be irritated by these trivialities. Have you not occasionally thought: I had expected something completely different, I had expected Jo to be more interested in my plans and more involved in my work-I thought she had loftier ideas about life? Tell me honestly, then I shall tell you that I had actually expected the same of myself- but that, without wishing it, I'm actually driven in a single di- rection by the thought: if we were carefully to steer clear of anything prosaic now and just live in a dream world, we'd be in for a nasty fall later on. We'd have a hard time doing ordinary
My dearest Theo, How I should like to be with you for a bit to make s you're not as despondent as you sounded in your last letters! Have you had any better news about Vincent? Perhaps I shall sure hear from you today. Reading what you had to say about him, understood exactly how foolish and impossible my questions must have seemed to you-but I wasn't really in a position to judge, was I? I knew that what you were doing for him was the best of course, but I didn't know why. How very, very hard his life is! But don't worry too much about it, my dearest-I wish there was something I could do to make you feel better.
After all those stormy days the sun has finally c day - but for me it's house arrest - I've caught another frightful cold-well, I have been out enough this week.- Come out to-
I was delighted with the beautifully detailed plan²-there's far more space than I had thought - I assumed that the rooms were only 3 or 3.5 m-now I see they're huge. We shall live like kings! And what a lot you have already. There seems to be al- most nothing left to buy. What is that chiffonière³ you've shown in the salon? I'm intrigued, I wasn't aware that you had it. What's happening to the bookcase, are you still thinking of exchanging it for another one? The curtains you wrote about are not expensive - what do they look like? Do they match the fabric you want to use for re-upholstering the canape? It's important for things to go well together, don't you agree? Sol should also like to know more about the bedroom furniture- it's black wood, is it not? You see, Lien insists on using red lining for a bedspread she's making us, but then the curtains must also match. But I'm not sure that red is nice for a bedroom. What do you think? I would have loved to be doing this together with you and discussing it all-though it's funny to try imagine it: what will it be like? I'm in great suspense! But you, poor fellow, are saddled with the work. I've just remembered that it's your sister Anna's birthday today-I sent my good wishes yesterday evening. Have you also written to her or doesn't your family do that any more?
I can't wait to read about your exhibition in the newspaper. Are quite a lot of people coming? My letter is held together by questions, but I want to talk to you, not sit here with this horrid scrap of paper. Yesterday morning I was talking to a former pupil of mine who is engaged to a marine officer who left in January to spend three years in the Indies. How can anyone bear it, three years! And we think three months a long time!
I have just seen pictures of the elections in the Illustration, the steps of the Opera and the statues in Place de la Concorde covered with posters, and such crowds in the streets!* As a result, Father and I got into a discussion about politics-the minister resigning etc: I thought Boulanger was merely a laughing- stock and a butt for cartoons, nothing more. But he does seem to be more important than that. It was very pleasant at Mrs Stricker's on Friday. I shall have to end off again because my letter must go before half past twelve. Goodbye my dearest-a kiss
from your Jo
Dearest Theo,
Did you know that I write you masses of letters you never receive? Well it's true, but they're never on paper, I just write them in my head-and I believe those are a e actually the best! After receiving your letter on Monday, I wrote a long reply in bed that night (I was so delighted with it) but had no time to write it down, and now that I finally can I've forgotten I tell you I thought I was getting a husband who was even-tempered? And I was relieved to hear he has a mind to be 'disagreeable sometimes' - as I am so often- so we've nothing to reproach one another for As long as we arrange our ups and downs so that we're not both down at the same time-be- cause, what then? It reminds me of a seesaw; perhaps we're about equally heavy and can keep each other in balance? most of it. Shall amazingly
And now it's my turn to inform you about the streak of contrariness in my nature - when you want me to be cool and pro- saic I get very sentimental, and vice versa - no, that would im- ply that you were sentimental-oh well, you know what I mean. I'm always the opposite of what people want me to be- so for one thing I'm not in the least afraid of intimidating you with my 'perfection'. I shan't say another word about the blue morning gown-it will only be a disappointment when you see it!
Yesterday was pleasant, though extremely busy. Mother was delighted with her Parisian letters and will write to you soon to thank you herself. It was strange seeing a letter from you that I wasn't even allowed to open-though I did read it afterwards anyway!!
In the morning we went to the Roman Catholic church to attend the wedding of Jan Nederhasselt's sister!' There were two nice things-a splendid solo voice accompanied by the organ and, directly above me, a beautiful painted window that the sun shone straight through-but the rest was frightfully tedious and I have a particular dislike of all Catholic clergymen, they all look so sanctimonious. Annie appears to be in good health at the moment.
Your idea of not having a second door in the kitchen is good; let them make the cupboard as big as possible-but what do you think about me having a word with Annie about 'kitchen matters' at some point? Not that we need to, but she might be offended if we left her out altogether - she did offer - and, of course, she would know about storage space etc. I'm glad you've found curtains you like so much - take them by all means - my mania for frugality makes me wonder whether f 50 for dining room curtains isn't a bit excessive and whether they mightn't do for the salon instead - which has only one window- but I can't make an informed judgement and I don't know how much you can afford.
Spring is still a long way off; it's dull and rainy.Tomorrow morning I'm going to Breda, which will bring me a little closer to you!5 If I can, I shall call on Mr. van Gogh on the Keizersgracht this afternoon, if it's not raining too hard-perhaps 6 you'll be seeing his wife in Paris one of these days.
We've been playing whist a lot in the evenings. Beb still has to learn, and we've even managed to persuade Father to join in. I don't read, there's never time-I've not even been to the Museum, much as I should like to. Dries must have enjoyed the Monets at yours, though he said nothing at all about it yester- day. Have you heard from Vincent yet? I do wonder what's 8 happening. I hope to get one more letter from you here and after that- well, you know the address! Ask Mr. Isaacson on my behalf kindly not to talk when you're writing-otherwise my letters take a day longer. Your portrait is surrounded by lovely flowers today, lilies and anemones - in honour of our Mother -goodbye, dearest, a kiss from
your Jo
If we could talk to each other again, just once, for I imagine that when you come here in April people won't leave us alone for a moment, that we won't be able to be there for each other! And how long ago it seems, how terribly long, since you were here - and since we were in Paris together! Do you still think about it sometimes? How reserved and unsure we were at the time-we had to ask each other everything- and that first evening with Dries- we've had far more pleas- ant evenings since. Will things always be so crescendo?
You know what I often wonder: why you actually love me. Could you tell me? I'd love a warm, affectionate letter from you-you see, if you're matter of fact in a letter, I get into a moonlight and roses mood. I'm a real weathercock! This after- noon Wil and I went to a florist to get flowers for Mrs. du Quesne. He took us into the conservatory, and my heart leapt at the fragrance of the violets and heliotrope - there were al- ready snowdrops outdoors. When you go to a florist at home they charge you one by one-it's most unpleasant.
Your Mother allowed me to read a couple of lovely letters from Cor-I also sent him a few words this afternoon-I had heard nothing at all from him since our engagement. I have al- ready invited him to the wedding-do you think he will come? Dries is already raising oh so many objections-but we're hoping to persuade them.? I was delighted to find Vincent's letter in the envelope as well-in any case, it's a sign of improvement - though one can see he is not yet completely well. I feel so terribly sorry for him. Would you give him my regards- keep writing to him, it will do him good.
How is the Monet exhibition going? Finished yet and successful? I've heard nothing more about it. Before going to Bre- da I paid a visit to the Keizersgracht, but found only Jos at home. Our conversation wasn't exactly lively, but it was quite all right-she said the trip to Paris would probably fall through, so your aunt won't be taking a parcel for me. And now I have to ask you something on Wil's behalf. She and Lies and Cor want to give us something, but now it's your turn to choose-a tablecloth, a little table or silver dessert cutlery? People are showering us with kindness, don't you agree?
 And then there are times when I think I'll improve from being with you-I think what draws us together most are the different qualities each of us possesses-because I'm intensely aware of what you have and I lack.
Will we get bored being together? I'm not very afraid of that because we share a deep love of beauty - and though I know far less about things than you, silence isn't always boredom! But I shall stop this ruminating-and continue in bed tonight. Instead, I shall tell you that Mr v Gogh and Tersteeg came for dinner on Saturday - I thought the latter looked very bad and seemed worried. He showed us the portrait of his son-just like our Wim. On Sunday afternoon Wil and I went to Princenhage, but unfortunately we couldn't see the paintings because Jacob had already taken them down. I went round to admire the house and garden Wil picked a lovely bouquet for me in the conservatory, which still graces the table, and afterwards Saartje gave us a nice cup of tea to thaw us out, as we were frozen to the bone. It's bitterly cold and snowing all the time. Wil also showed me the Japanese pictures, which gave us no end of amusement - they're such funny combinations of very beautiful and very ugly things.5
And now a few words about our home-the sarongs will brighten up our chocolate-coloured dining room - but one thing I do object to is your having the kitchen all arranged before I get there, or do you only mean decorated? I must do the rest myself, with Annie if need be but not by her -I should rather do it myself. Has De Haan been to see Dries? How very nice. I intend to write to Dries myself one of these days - I know nothing about him.
And now, poor outcast, I'm going to say good night because Mother's tired and the light has to go out. Write soon and send me another letter as wonderful as this - (though I forget that, un- like me, you don't have the whole day to do nothing but what you feel like) and if you feel like writing, then for heaven's sake tell Isaacson to be still-he'll get the blame if your letters take too long-good night dearest, a kiss
from your Jo
My dearest Theo,
I have just received your letter and needn't tell you how profoundly sorry I am to hear that Vincent is unwell again; in the first place for his sake, but no less for yours. If only I were with you perhaps I could do something to comfort you- but what can such a miserable scrap of paper say? Wil and I talk about you and think of you both all the time-it's good that I came here because I'm getting to know and understand you so much better in your absence and I'm getting a far, far clearer picture of your relationship with Vincent.-I do hope he'll recover once he receives good and prolonged nursing-it's just been temporary every time and he kept going back to his solitude too soon.
I'm glad you liked my last few letters more than the ones be- fore-I'm very much influenced by my surroundings, which is why I once said that I hoped to improve when I was with you- there's something good in all of you that inspires goodness in others. I hope our home will have the same atmosphere, and for that I rely on you. I should have liked to stay on here much longer if I could, but it won't be possible. I just have to tell you once again how kind Wil is to me. I don't deserve it, as I've never been able to do anything, not even for you- for which I re- motely deserve it. That remains to be seen in the future- which is not so far off any more! I shall reply to your letter this evening. This is just a note to let you know I'm thinking of you and wish, oh so much, that I could do something for you, or better still, that we could be together. Don't lose heart and hope for the best - a kiss from
your Jo
My very dearest Theo,
What a lazy correspondent I've been this week - but it didn't go well and sticking a few sentences together doesn't make any difference-I think it's because I touched on so many matters with Wil and got into more profound discussions than I have done for ages - and that revived so many things from the past and I needed time to resolve them-but I think I've taken a small step forward. Lots of things have become clearer. And things are falling more into place-the searching and working are no longer so remote, so vague, but very distinct, all of it far simpler. I wish I could give you a glimpse into my heart, as you want-but that doesn't happen all at once, and a good thing it is, too-if you already knew all there is to know about me and I about you, we would miss the pleasure of discovering it all gradually. This way, you'll see good things sometimes and sometimes bad, and you'll have to take them for what they are. There might even be a few surprises in store!
What surprised me about you is your astonishing talent for dealing with practical matters. I see you as an example - and I think I have a lot to learn from you in that and other respects. The curtains are gorgeous-just like those we have in our room at home in the summer. The wallpaper is also quite simi- lar - I think it will look very cheerful and gay – just what I want- ed. But, dearest, I thought that in Paris rugs were not needed on the floor-are they not parquet floors? In that case, of course, a couple of small rugs in the salon would be fine. In the bedroom absolutely no carpet-I would say not even a rug-it would be a bit overdone.- Before I forget, I should tell you I was born on 4 October 1863. Could you not work it out, Dries and you, or did neither of you know how old I was?' But no, in earnest, it's March already - how many weeks to go? When are you coming? Another dull chapter we have to discuss-the church wedding. As you know, your Mother suggested that Reverend v G2 come to our house, but now Father is strongly against it. 
Do you really believe they'll discover a force that will help us to understand all the mysteries of life? I don't-in my view there's only one certainty, the relentless law of cause and effect - man is the author of his own fate and of the fate of those who come after him. We can't always distinguish the cause, but it's there all the same, perhaps in an earlier generation or whatever!
You were right about Breda not being a beautiful city-all I like is the church'- and the views of the city from a distance. It's bitterly cold here and blustery, snow now and then - I'm so glad we're go- ing into summer. I've suffered dreadfully from the cold this year - we'll make our home nice and warm in the winter-we both love that. So, you're as rich as a king? In that case, we can furnish our home like a little palace, because that's what it sounds like from your descriptions-goodbye, my dearest, a fond kiss from
your Jo
Margo Begeman came today. She said I was getting a very dear man-(as if I didn't know). In a few minutes Wil and I are going to have a quick look at the church, and that will be the end of Breda for me. We were in church on Sunday morning as well, but it was so unpleasant that I'd have been out of sorts for the rest of the day had Wil not cheered me up.
But, dearest, it was a bit foolish of you really to write to Father about the wedding. He doesn't mind whether it's in church or not-just not a wedding at home. So it's actually up to you to decide because I've told you what I think, now you have to figure out what we can do as far as your Mother is concerned. Isn't that so? Or have you tried again with Father? I shall be terribly disappointed if Dries doesn't come-how is he at the moment, and what's the atmosphere in Passy like in general? Do you enjoy going there so often? I'm jealous that Annie gets to see so much of you, and I never do. They must be delighted to have something to hang up-it was very sweet of you.
There's just one thing that your Mother and I have been racking our brains about. How can the bedroom curtains be more expensive than those for the salon? Please sort this out op for us, if you would. At the moment, to tell you the truth, I'm #happiest just thinking about ordinary domestic things, be- cause if I turn my attention to anything profound, in the end it always turns out to be less important than our life together, and I have neither ears nor eyes for anything else. I'm sure it will pass, because if it doesn't I shall become amazingly selfish - and that won't do, of course.
The weather is still cold- but dry and bright. It was fun to see the masquerade in the street, especially here, where you only ever see very prim and proper people passing by, and all of a sudden there's red and gold and those handsome velvet knights' capes and sweet little demons. But everyone walks round as if they were merely coat racks for their costumes-it must be nice in the South, where they really assume a role on these occasions. All of us i.e. your Mother, Wil and I, are anxious for news from Arles-should we just assume that no news is good news? Write to me soon-tomorrow I shall be a bit further away from you again. I wonder what's happening in Lei- den. I do wish you were here. Goodbye, dearest, just keep thinking of
your Jo
My very dearest Theo,
It seems so long since I last wrote to you that I can't even re- member when it was. We've been poor correspondents lately -fortunately it won't be necessary much longer. As you see, I'm at Anna's at the moment. She had actually counted on my staying a bit longer, but I honestly can't-I have to go home this evening. I'm very fond of Anna's husband, but it's not pleasant seeing them together-there's a stiffness, an indescribable coldness about their home - and it was so wonderful in Breda! It's hard to imagine that Anna is one of you. She's literally unlike any of you, entirely different from Wil-dear, kind Wil, I was so sorry to leave her!
But it's really most ungrateful of me to talk about A like that, because she is very kind to me. You've no idea what surprises are in store for you when you come to A.' Everyone's so good to us, even little Saar and Annetje² are hard at work for us. I didn't actually pay much attention to them the last time we were here together, but they're adorable children-only a bit too well brought up, I think, although perhaps it's good to get used to being obedient. It's something I never learnt and al- ways did as I pleased, I know that.
Yesterday afternoon we called on Gerritsen³ and aunt Louise, who grew quite sentimental thinking how she had known you when you were all so small and had liked you all so much. She asked me to convey her warmest compliments. Lien Kruisse came yesterday evening, but I didn't get along with her very well. I have to ask you something before I forget, which is, how long is our table in the dining room? Anna promised me a spread for it that would also serve as a table- cloth in the mornings, but she needs to know the size. Some time ago you mentioned buying a table for the room, but I thought you already had one? I look forward to hearing what you've decided about the furniture. It's actually quite wretched that you have to go through all this trouble on your own, dearest, but whatever you do, don't bother yourself too much about it!
My darling
I so much need to have a few words with you, if only for a while, this quiet Sunday evening. A letter like the one from Leiden-I'm so ashamed-is something I could have written to a friend-and that to you-in a couple of weeks my lord and master! I think of you so often and would so much like to tell you how I feel deep deep inside-but it doesn't work. Maybe you can guess? Do you remember what you wrote about your Mother and Wil, about feeling closer to them now?' I know exactly what you mean, and I suppose it's the same f making me less attached to my family. I'm telling you this quite frankly, because I believe I exaggerated last time I talked about going away. I'm so aware that my days of being like a child at home are behind me-everything has changed. I'm deeply grateful to have been able to enjoy a home so much and for so long, but now that's no longer enough. There comes a time for every without pressure little bird to fly! How wonderful it will be when we're together at last, with no-one else around us, from outside-finally able to talk heart to heart. Now I know your next letter will say: 'don't have any illusions, my love', but you surely think the same at times, don't you? 
You can't imagine how much I enjoyed my stay in Breda. I can't tell you how wonderful it was to be in your former surroundings-well, not exactly the same, but the same furniture you saw as a child, the same pictures - the same - but I know you will laugh at me-perhaps only women have such foolish thoughts. And your dear Mother and Wil! But you asked what I thought of Anna. Well she was so friendly to me (not sugary sweet, but genuinely warm) that beneath her aloofness I believe she's very kind. I suppose she's never had much joy, much happiness, and she lives for only one thing: duty in respect of all sorts of trivialities, things that seem pointless to me. But she does what she believes to be right. She hasn't a very broad view of life, and she and her husband appear not to understand one another too well, or to satisfy each other's needs. It's unfortunate for both of them.
Hearing about Passy made me jealous again - I used to think - I wasn't the type- I never begrudge anyone anything they have and I don't- but the fact that you spend a great deal of time with them, while I have to content myself with letters, arouses a little demon in me- which can only be dispelled by a warm, very long, letter from you.- And just when I'd got used to the idea of you wanting a different interior from Dries's, you start singing its praises - and I suppose I shall have to take lessons from Annie. Will you mind if I'm not as competent and clever as Annie? See how jealous I am? I have to go downstairs (I'd sought refuge in Henri's inner sanctum). Good night, my love, my best of the best, a kiss from
your Jo. - who's longing for you.-
More about business next time.
I'm so pleased you bought all that lovely furniture - what a nice, cosy home we shall have.-
There was something about your exhibition in the Amsterdammer. I shall cut it out if I can-though it won't be of interest to you. I just liked seeing your name in print!
My dearest, I don't want to let Father's letter' go without even saying good day to you. I received your letter this afternoon-reading it gave me a moment of joy, the same as you felt when you stood at the open window and breathed in the lovely, fresh spring air. I'd been out, my last stop was at Mrs. Stricker, and walked back along the outer canal enjoying the spring-like day, the glorious blue sky and pleasant sunshine. Your letter was waiting for me at home-it was in the same mood! And if you say you're happy. I'm doubly so - imagine if we were always to feel we made each other happy! That would be just a little too perfect-but on the whole that's how it will be. Some you of your letters are so intimate and forthright, and that's when feel reassured, as if nothing could come between us. Do see the difference in my letters as well, and does it affect the same way? Are you wondering whether I shall still love you when you get back? If so, you ought to ask. You want to see it in my eyes - I like hearing the same from you. Your voice is what always remains in my mind. What nonsense I'm writing instead of saying how I pity you having to be in the midst of such a wretched mess. So you see, I'm nothing but a nuisance and things will only get worse when I'm with you, of course. De Haan must surely be cursing me. One of these days I shall go to see De Bock's exhibition.' I do wish we could go together-I only understand paintings when you explain them to me. t you
The wonderful calmness I felt in Breda has gone-I'm in a complete fluster. Do you know what I should like most-to go straight to our own home-but we couldn't do that, could we? Though if we could, I wouldn't start housekeeping straight away. No, first we would just enjoy being together and living on moonlight and roses-would you like that? Or would it make you listless-it would me.
If you need the money we're getting from Father for anything at all, do say so - you've already spent so much! Just three more weeks and we might be sitting here together. Good night, dearest, a kiss
from your Jo
No news from Vincent yet?
I was delighted with your letter and the Figaro yesterday-] My dearest Theo, was so afraid the Monet exhibition would not meet your expectations, and I would have been most disappointed for you. enjoyed the article in la Justice very much. When I received the newspaper I wrote a few words about it inside the envelope of a letter I was about to send off-but it was almost illegible-sol e the envelope ended up in the wastepaper basket and suppose that you did not see what I wrote. You shall say: but who writes on the inside of an envelope? Well indeed, you're perfectly right.
That Mr. Mirbeau is certainly enthusiastic-is he a friend of Monet's or is it pure admiration? The gentlemen of the press have such a great influence on the public, and how easily it could be abused! But it must give one a singular sense of power, if one really does love something and can inspire people to share one's admiration. I'd like to be a journalist-if I were a man.
I'd simply love to know what artists are really like deep down-does Monet mind what people say about him? Is he as independent as Mirbeau suggests? But surely no-one is completely free of human vanity - I expect it's like everything else-somewhat mixed! Do you know what I simply cannot grasp? To be honest, I've never given it much thought and no- one has ever talked to me about it-that new movement. Please don't be shocked at my ignorance, I'm expressing my self badly again. I mean, I see every artist as an - an entirely unique personality-Monet is Monet - yet you individual-only write about him as if he were the personification of a movement, and as if his triumph were therefore important not only for him but for the movement as a whole. I should so like to know more about this. Wil also once asked whether I liked 'the new movement', and all I could say was that I did not know. I'm familiar with a few painters, but I don't understand the connection between them. 
Have you not heard from Arles yet? Did you not get a letter in reply to yours-and do none of the doctors even tell you whether he really is unable to write or whether it is as you feared? I can imagine how anxious you must be.
I must tell you I don't find the letter from aunt Cornelie all that bad-or, should I say, I shall take her out as much as she wants during the day with the greatest pleasure-but surely she'll let us alone in the evenings? Don't upset her (as you can see, I learnt in Breda how important she is in the family). But seriously, when you're married you send your wife off with her in your place - if you have to be at work-isn't that convenient? But she will also have to come and dine with us, which is worse. I had already planned a menu for that festive occasion with your again. Mother and Wil-but I'm afraid I've forgotten it
There's nothing in particular-I went out with Father and the girls yesterday evening, actually I hadn't been out with them for quite some time-I really didn't feel like it–but it wasn't very nice for him, so when Father asked who would accompany him?' I raised my finger along with the others. There was a concert by a ladies' band from Vienna imagine a lady playing the contrabass-one on the flute - and another on the bass drum, there was a violinist who looked - I am afraid the classics were not their genre.
Thank you for the measurements of the table. Anna's coming here tomorrow and I shall be able to tell her-we're going shopping together. I bought a new dress which I hope you will like, brique with a black border. Do you suppose your toilet will be of interest to you? wife's
I still have something nice to tell you remember that Henri asked what we might like, and 'people' said- a soup you-do spoon. But in fact I think that's frightfully dull and of no use at all-so I've asked for a tea table with pretty blue Japanese cups. Do you approve? 
Everyone at home took to her, she was very cordial and not the least bit aloof. We asked whether Sara' might also come on the day of the reception-it would be nice to have such an adorable, blonde bridesmaid. Do you really recognise something of Anna in yourself? In fact, I can well imagine you might-I do too I know that I myself bear the seed of every fault and every shortcoming in any of us, and I condemn others all the more harshly so that I myself don't lapse. Do you know what's so singular about our f family? Father has something persistently solid in his character, which Mother lacks entirely. She relies solely on her feeling, which is exceptionally well developed so she can trust it implicitly, be cause her instincts are always right, but she wouldn't have been like that if she'd had to be on her own. Well, these two conflicting things are in all of us to a greater or lesser extent- specially Dries-and it often makes him unhappy. He wants something, but hasn't his Father's strength to accomplish it- while the sensitivity he got from his mother makes him take things far too much to heart and suffer because of what he lacks - and I recognise the same in myself, which is the very reason I'm always afraid to give in to it. This is what has always driven me to seek my own way, to leave home, to be independent, because I know that if I didn't use the strength I have, if I didn't harden myself a bit, I wouldn't realise my potential. But that's also why I understand Dries the best. Henri, Lien and Mien accept themselves as they are- that's fine for Lien because she is somebody, but not for the others. But good heavens, how my thoughts are wandering - it would be better for me to tell you about Anna and Jan Veth visiting us yesterday- he told me he'd written to you and was delighted with what you had sent him.5 They've half a mind to pay a little visit to
Paris this summer. Wouldn't that be nice? If Dries is really not coming, I should like Jan to be my ness-but Father doesn't care for him, so I would have to use all my powers of persuasion before it came to that. Have you asked Jo van Houten yet?" Mother was wit- stay with us, at least if he's prepared to improvise a bit.
you go to the Keizersgracht even if Vincent from London is still there?" Jan Stricker also has a place at your disposal, Madam said. It's all getting wonderfully close. Last night I dreamt you were here already-no, actually, that we were al- ready in our apartment - it was a marvellous dream! What are you doing tomorrow? Do you still call on Van Praag? Do go out, because it must be horrid for you with your rooms so empty-I feel terribly guilty that I've done nothing. It was an unfair division of labour this time-but once we're married I shall make up it up to you and do everything-would you like never having to make coffee or pour the tea or sew buttons on your gloves? After all, your wife must be good for something. It's cold and bitter here, every hint of spring has gone. If I were aunt Cornelie, I should stay where it's sunny and warm. And Arles? Theo, why do you not tell me anything about Vincent? Doesn't the physician ever write to you any more? Do let me know how things are going." Are Vincent's beautiful fruit trees hanging in the salon? That would be nice - oh dear, there's so much you'll have to describe to me-I simply can't wait. I daren't make this letter any longer-it's an endless epistle. Your last letter came at II o'clock in the evening, just after I'd gone to bed-I love reading letters in bed because you can take your time thinking about them! Now, dearest, take good care #of yourself and don't tire yourself out (go to bed early at night or do you stay up late chatting?). You needn't write much, just keep thinking of your very loving Jo
My dearest Theo,
I do beg your pardon, but I have to begin by contradicting you-one certainly can fry a steak with a knowledge of geography. I presume to pride myself on being adept at both.' Aren't you glad? Oh, but what a dear, caring, clever man you are - you do think of everything. It's reassuring, most of all, to know there'll be someone to do the cooking. I can manage the rest myself-but that!! And the new wallpaper in the salon is beautiful, though I do believe you're making it all too nice. Shall I tell you something good as well? I have received the tea table and cups, which is to say, when you come they'll be ceremoniously presented to us, but they're here at home all the same - I hope you'll like them as much as I do.'
Do take good care of yourself with your cold-as for me, I believe it has become a chronic condition, although this is just the weather for it. This morning I went out in the finest spring weather you can imagine, only to return home an hour later in a snowstorm and bitter, piercing wind-real March storms! I'm glad you sent me the note from Mirbeau. At first I couldn't quite understand that article, but now it's perfectly clear.
Last night I was interrupted by a visit from Dr Cramer.4 This afternoon I was just about to continue writing, when Bertha v. Gogh turned up and later Mrs. Schogt. Now I've simply fled upstairs, because Lida Dirks will be coming soon and she would detain me once again. Here I'm safe and sound, and can talk to you for a while. Today I read something by Jane Welsh, Carlyle's wife, who says that if there's ever a time that one should be earnest and reflective, if there's ever a time one should spurn vanity and idle chatter, it's when two people are joined together to share life's joys and sorrows. I know how true that is, and yet I rarely see or hear anything other than 'vanity and idle chatter', indeed, I myself avidly indulge in both. But then that thinking ahead doesn't really help-I some- times spend hours worrying whether I'm suitable and sensible nothing sensible enough to fulfil the new duties that await me-and then suddenly I feel a thousand pounds lighter when I realise smoothly-nothing yes, when we're together I will be, because I want more than to make you happy, and if I succeed-in a variety of little ways, by making sure things run could be easier. But I imagine we shall be able to discuss this at great length when you're here. It won't be like last time, always out and about-we shall have far more time and do exactly we please-and we'll go to the museum, won't we? And stay as there talking (I do make good use of the museum, don't !!). Well, actually, things will only quieten down after the wedding -but then for good. I've advised Wil to elope in secret when she marries-it would be much easier!" My bridal gown is being made, everything has to be ready when you come-then I shall be there for you and you alone, dearest, and I expect you to put some sense into my head. But I must confess that I enjoy all this frivolity I, who never used to pay any heed and never gave it a thought. How a person can change! I wonder whether anyone else has gone through as many different stages as I. Oh, certainly, a young girl's life may appear to be peaceful and unconstrained, but in reality that's not the case. There was a time when my only ambition was to study, to be clever, to know everything (at the very least). That was my ideal-I believe Wil is going through a similar stage at the moment. I lived in my books up to a point where I felt it wasn't right-that that wasn't really life. And I always had to make my own decisions-others are faced with circumstances which dictate that they must do this or that. I was completely free to go my own way, which was sometimes very hard. My period in Elburg was what I would call a time of pleasant reality'. I was doing something, not with what I had learnt, I was somebody in that small circle, but in the long run it was too confined and parochial. Then there was a time in A, when I felt I ought to 8 go out into the world' - see lots of people, get about, be update on everything, in a word, an ordinary person, but that too proved unsatisfying in the long run. And finally, having gone to through one stage and another, I learnt that happiness, the aim of life, is not something distant but actually very close-that I can and must devote myself to making both of us happy.
don't know how to express this, but it feels as if my real life is only about to begin-as if everything up to now has been merely a rehearsal from which I hope both of us will benefit. I know perfectly well that it's not like a novel: they marry and live happily ever after-but that it will also be difficult at times. We shall just have to see that we get through them together. I realise I'm preaching, I'm not very good at it.-
I still have to tell you what we received from uncle Cor and his wife this afternoon: a canteen with 12 beautiful little spoons. I was so taken aback, I didn't know what was happening. There was a little card with it. So I shall have to go and thank them tomorrow-I wish you could be there too. This morning I sorted all my books and packed them. I must tell you I'm a dreadful hoarder, and I still had all my notes from school-essays, exercise books etc. but I've destroyed them all except for a couple of curiosities e.g. aesthetics, which I want to show you. I relived all my schooldays in those few hours-it was a very happy time. This morning I received a foot cushion from Wil, one she had made herself-people seem to be doing all they can to indulge us. Please come soon to see all these lovely things. Just one more Sunday without you and then never again. Night, my dearest husband - do let me know how you're doing in your old quarters. Are they awfully bare? Do go out. Have you called on Dries lately?
Cor is not yet of age so he can't act as a witness. Now I truly shall end off. An affectionate kiss from
your Jo
My dearest Theo,
I, too, am much to blame as regards my correspondence recently. I certainly wouldn't have allowed a Sunday evening t go by without writing (because that's my favourite time for it) re- had not Cor Bonger and his wife-you know, the relatives from Leiden -- come expressly to spend another day with so I couldn't possibly closet myself away in the evening. I'm me, worried about your health and long to hear from you. I sup- pose there'll be a letter from Paris this afternoon. We can start counting them now-I think one reason we're writing less is because we know we'll be together soon - I'm sure that's also why our letters, mine at least, are far less earnest, indeed, or should I say positively frivolous, which they might otherwise not have been. But I kept thinking: that's something we'll talk about later. However, I regret it now because there are masses of subjects one doesn't normally discuss at length but which are suitable for thrashing out in letters. But as usual it's too late for regrets - because, let's see: yes, perhaps I shall write one more letter and then I shall no longer be able to. Tant mieux!
I'm glad you got a letter from Vincent - even though it transpired that he was far from well yet. In any case, it's a step for- ward and at least you have some idea of what's going on inside him. Is he still in Arles?3 Saturday's his birthday, is it not? I should so much like to write to him-do you think I might? and what's the address?
Did I tell you Dries wrote to say he couldn't come. He seems very concerned about money. Does he talk to you about it as well? To me he made much of the fact that everything is very expensive and that we should be aware of what we are letting ourselves in for. I feel so sorry for him. Yet there must be some mistake in his calculations, because one must surely get by, no matter how small one's income- and I'm certain they do nothing extravagant. I wrote to him yesterday and to Annie as well, asking if she'd buy a couple of things for the kitchen-only the essentials. I shall get the rest myself in good time. You'll probably want to discuss it with her and arrange when it can be delivered etc. And would you do me another big favour and buy a gas cooker like theirs? If I have that it will be far easier to do things myself and we'll not need to keep the femme de menage¹ on so long. But it's also all right if you think it better to wait-perhaps you have an appliance just to boil water or something in the mornings. What a domestic letter this is once again!
Last time you wrote you said you were sometimes 'rude', and I kept wondering whether you really mean it. I could never imagine that-I had indeed suspected you might be curt and, if necessary, disagreeable (it can be such a relief to say some- thing disagreeable sometimes). I only hope that if you ever mean to be especially nice to me, you'll find a way to show it- for I shouldn't like it if you were unkind instead. Should I be out of sorts, just put a book in front of me and the mood will pass by itself. I believe we've given each other fair warning now, haven't we?
This afternoon I'm going to call on Stricker and the Keizersagracht and then dine with Mrs Sethe. Apart from that I've t been at home a lot lately, hardly out at all-I preferred it that way. The papers for our wedding are in order - our banns have Final to be published in Utrecht as well, would you believe - I'd forgotten to have my name removed from the municipal register.
What a fuss! Goodbye, my love, I can almost say till Sunday
your Jo
My dearest Theo,
Just a quick, last little letter now to wish you a pleasant journey on Saturday'-there's not much news but I feel like talking to you for a while. Dries and Annie must be with you at the moment - I like having some idea of what you are that's so rare and then you disappear in the bustle of Paris. You know, I'm really very pleased that you picked out a quiet little spot for us to live-it's far more home like! doing, but
I'm more than doubly glad it's nearly Sunday-in the first place, of course, because you'll soon be here, but it also means an end to all your drudging and slaving away at the and I keep wondering what it must be like at Rue Lepic? Not everything has gone, has it? Is it terribly miserable? Where is De Haan? Did he loyally keep you company right up to the end?
My last letters to you were not half as banal as they ought to have been because I should have asked you all this before. I hope it won't be too cold for you in the train on Saturday night. Do wrap up warmly in the travelling blanket, will you? Would you like them to join you on the train in Breda? Wil suggested that I go to Breda on Saturday and we could all travel back together on Sunday - I think it might be wiser to wait at the station here and see who arrives on the Paris train.
Yesterday afternoon I called on Mrs. Stricker, which was just as pleasant as ever-beautiful flowers at the window and flowers on the table that Kee had received for her birthday (to my shame I didn't know it was her birthday.) This afternoon! bumped into her in the street again and it was lovely walking a little way together. I can't tell you how much I like her-Wil doesn't feel the same but we've never had a chance to talk about it and I simply can't imagine what she has against her. How very happy she was in the short time she was married, whenever she talks about it she still radiates joy through the sorrow of her loss. Yesterday she mentioned that 18 April was her wedding anniversary as well, so I wouldn't presume to ask her to spend that day with us!
Today I did some sewing on my wedding dress. I've gradually become reconciled to the prospect of the church, what about you? The past few days have been really homely in an old-fashioned way. It was just me of course-I was suddenly aware of all I had neglected to do for them all, how indebted I was-so much affection I hadn't returned, so many small kind- nesses I had failed to show, and I wanted to make up for it all in those few days, so the atmosphere left nothing to be desired. But now, my love, I'm longing for you to come, now that you've had some good news about Vincent I'm sure you're not so worried about him.
Can you believe that these months have already passed-it seemed so long when you left, but it has indeed been long, not now, in retrospect, but it was at the time, now everything's totally different.
I suppose I shall hear from you tomorrow and then you'll be here in person. Night very dearest Theo,
a kiss from your Jo

What did Mme Bataille say when you
saw her again? Are you eating well there, and how do you
spend your evenings? Have you been sleeping well? Do you go
to bed early-oh, husband of mine, please write and tell me
everything-though the occasional postcard would also be
fine!
I talk to the little one about his father all day long-come to us soon. Goodbye, my love, lots and lots of kisses from
your wife
Dearest husband of mine,
Here I am to say good night again, although Wim is doing all he can to prevent me. He's as high-spirited as he is big and calls little Vincent the eighth wonder of the world. Our little darling is gradually becoming his old self-this evening he went into his cradle wide awake and fell asleep without a peep. They say that I spoil him but, in fact, they all come running the very moment he starts crying. Every night and morning I give him a couple of extra kisses from his father - whom we both miss very much. Is my faithful correspondent letting me down? I've heard nothing yet today - but that's what comes of spoiling people, it makes them ungrateful.' The weather is still unsettled, but aunt Lien nevertheless took the little one out for a while when there was a fine spell. I've not been out yet as I'm a bit nervous of the stairs - though I'm as good as better-just a little tired still. I have no idea what I do all day - I don't feel quite at home yet. The nice thing, you know, is not having to plan menus, but it's strange sitting at table with so many people, and when the little one sits with Mother or Lien I some- times feel for a moment as if I'm back at home, just like in the old days - but then I remember I have my own lovely home in Paris with a naughty husband whom I don't love at all, but miss terribly all the same. We saw a mouse just a moment ago and everyone leapt on to their chair, but the panic has subsided and I can get back to my letter.
While I was undressing the boy this evening I happened to glance out the window and saw something beautiful. A tall church spire in the distance, rising up over the red rooftops, solemn and melancholy in the grey evening mist-there's a lovely view of the museum as well,' but the trees are nowhere near as nice as ours. I can't wait to hear whether you'll have to bring the Corot to The Hague-have you asked the marquis yet? My dearest, I'm dreadfully sleepy-my usual complaint- but it's so dreary going to bed alone. I shall be so glad when you're back with me-night my beloved-don't forget
your Jo
Dear, dear husband,
Thank you for the pleasant note you enclosed with your letter to Father and Mother.' You know, I opened the letter with- out looking at the address. I could see from a mile away who it was from and fell upon it straight away. I took the little one out for the first time today, wonderful to take him myself again. It was a bit windy, but nevertheless pleasant, and we found a warm, sunny spot in Vondel Park.
 Mrs Sethe and her girls came as well; she comes every day and is most kind. On the way back we called on because it was Uncle's birthday recently and of course I hadn't been there yet. They were delighted that I came and thought I looked very well and the little one very sweet.
Aunt even took him on her lap and he smiled at her. Jo Weissman dined with us today and Jeanette Weissman came for coffee and Mr. Mey had already called early this morning. But he said to Mother, 'my good woman, from what you told me I expected your daughter to look like a wraith, but she's turned into a fine, strapping woman'. (Dearest, I'm repeating literally what he said).
I was glad, because here they keep nagging about me being frail. It's unkind of me to say so, because they do all they can for me, but it is tiresome! Beb's coming tomorrow, I'm looking forward to it - even though it will be very busy.
And when will you start making plans to come over? Do you realise it's nearly the end of July? How do you spend your day? Have you seen many people? You'll have so much to tell me when you come, will you not? I never actually write any- thing sensible to you, because I always think - we'll discuss that together some time-dearest, do you truly miss me a little? Do you not sometimes think-ah, wonderful to be free again? I imagine you might not tell me if you did, but I really would like to know. As soon as I've recovered my strength I shall honestly be less of a burden and more help to you, believe me, my love. Now I have to get back to bed again-I look for- ward to tomorrow's letter.
you and could Night my beloved. I wish I were lying beside give you a night kiss. A kiss from our little one and from
your Jo
My dearest,
I do apologise for yesterday's letter, what must you have thought!' I was tired and toothachey and ill-humoured, but to- day things look brighter and far more cheerful again. That's the drawback of letter-writing-one day you're out of sorts and write a letter in that mood and a couple of days later, when you've forgotten all about it, someone else reads it and, if that someone happens to be your husband, he might think it nasty or worry about it, when it's really not worth it. Beb cheered me up completely-she stayed last night and, as if a spell had been cast, the little one woke up twice, but I thought it better not to breastfeed him because I had been quite upset. So she very kindly helped me warm up the bottle, though she was drop- ping from exhaustion, and then early this morning we took him to bed with us and he was just like a little cherub. At 8 o'clock I gave him the breast again and he fell asleep in my arms; we slept on like that until half past nine when he woke up with a little smile on his face and in his eyes. I took him out again this morning and he always sleeps quite peacefully in his carriage. Now Mother and Mien have taken him to the Vondel Park and I'll go to fetch them in a while. Oh, dearest, they're all very kind to me. Lien and Mien always cook that stuff (and it's a lot of work) and do all they can-but whose fault is it that my husband indulges me so that no-one else can match up?
Your lovely letter has just arrived, and when I read about your coming 8 days earlier my heart leapt with joy. Do whatever you can and whatever you think best-I shouldn't want you to miss anything for my sake, but wouldn't I be thrilled if you came! I keep reproaching myself for not telling you enough about our boy-but you have to see him. How can I describe his dear, contented little face - I believe he behaves better here- he loves distraction and company, and when people around him are talking he looks at each of us in turn, very politely; and frequent outings break the day up nicely for him. Dearest, I don't need any money whatsoever - I've not spent a single cent except ten cents to Wim for a glass of beer. Jeannette, the seamstress, came this morning and she'll repair all the bits and pieces for me-the red dress, the morning gown and, if you would bring it, the dyed dress as well. Everyone loves my hat, though I've not been out once yet in all my finery. It will be wonderful walking out arm-in-arm with you again. What might be the matter with Vincent? Did we go too far the day he came? My dearest, I have firmly resolved never to squabble with you again-and always to do what you wish. With that good resolution I shall end off for today. I wish I could be with you tomorrow - will you call on Tanguy in the morning?3 and afterwards? Have lots of your socks got holes? I've 2 more pairs for you here when you come. Have you been in pain and how is the cough? Please tell me all about yourself.
There's a piece on Forain in the Spectator. I've not read anything else. Would you take the books back to the library if you have time? Is Victorine looking after you well? Have you got a little pot of honey for breakfast? I have to end off now. Goodbye my dearest, dearest love-in my thoughts I lay my head lightly on your shoulder- and feel at peace. Lots of kisses from little Vincent and from
your Jo
My very dearest love,
 I'm so glad I waited for your letter before writing this evening because now I can reply straight away. Oh, my love, I'm sorry you're brooding so over those tiresome money matters and that you're left worrying about it all on your own while I'm having such an easy time of it here - only one more week and you'll be sitting here with me and we shall think of nothing except how fine it is to be together again. And when you've had a good rest and feel more relaxed, you'll see every- thing in a different light and stop fretting. I think you're absolutely right about moving-our little apartment is far too pleasant and cosy for us to go rushing out of it, and it would certainly be wiser to keep our expenses as low as possible. I shall honestly do my best as well. But, dearest, there's one thing I do object to: your comparing us to Dries & Annie. I realize that you're seeing them quite often and, listening to all Dries's sombre musings, you can't help but be influenced by him-I remember the same thing happening once before - but you mustn't allow it to. Dries always paints things blacker than they are-you've seen that yourself, and he's like that in everything. Did he not tell me that Mother had to live more frugally than in the past and that Henri would help out when she couldn't make ends meet? And not a word of it is true. I realise this is different, but I know how he makes things look gloomy, and he mustn't. I do wish I could give you some of my own peace of mind as far as that's concerned. Truly, my dearest, there's no point worrying-there'll be time enough when the problem is on our doorstep. Don't torment yourself before it actually happens - and even then? Who can predict how things will work out? Just promise you'll think of nothing this week except your trip to Holland-you need it so badly, my love, and if you weren't coming on Sun- day, I wouldn't manage without you any longer either. We're doing very well now-little Vincent and I-he grows sweeter by the day. This morning he fell asleep in bed with me with his hand on my face-like a little cherub. I take him to the park every morning straight after breakfast and he sleeps all the way through. You asked about the milk-I have less than in and even then it's scarcely enough for him. But fortunately that milk with barley water is working out well-his bowel movements are better than ever, which is a good sign, is it not? At night I always give him the breast as usual. We've not tried rusk porridge yet-it can still wait a while.
Guess who was here today. Isaacson - he was friendly and very kind and thought the child was adorable. He thought you might be angry with him because you'd not replied, but I hadn't much time to talk to him. Mr. and Mrs. Brak were here too and a few other people as well.-Around 4 o'clock I took the tram and popped round to aunt Mien, and promised to call on her for coffee on Thursday and take the child. This morning I received a letter from Mother from Leiden - whether I could say anything about our plans because aunt Mina and Kee Vos would be at their home on Tuesday a week. Well, that works out perfectly-you're coming here a week today- then we'll spend a week in Amsterdam and go on to Leiden, won't we? That's what I'll write and tell her, shall I? I do hope you all had a pleasant day out in the country. The weather here is finer than it has been. Dear husband, isn't this actually a quiet time at work or do you still have a lot to do? What time do you have dinner and how do you spend the evenings? Aunt Gampert told me you spent a night in Passy. Did you? I still have to write a few quick words to Mother, so I shall say good night. So that's all arranged - we'll stay in our little nest and I shall do my best to be as thrifty as can be-but don't worry too much, my love. Oh, if only I were with you. You don't feel ill, do you? Write and tell me all about yourself- you'll cheer up as soon as you take the little one on your lap again. A kiss on your lips, my very dearest husband, just keep thinking of
your Jo
My dearest, Here I am again to assure you that we're getting on very well. The little one was in the park by 9 o'clock this morning, I had taken a book and sat reading until 12 o'clock, then after coffee Lien took him to the Vondel Park-where Sethe's girls always reserve a bench for us and then faithfully escort the carriage. Lize Schogt called and the two of us went to fetch Lien from the park- so there you have it, an account of our day. The weather seems to be clearing up. Today was warm, but now we're plagued by mosquitoes. They've had a nasty go at little Vincent-three bites on his cheek and a whole lot on his fore- head - Mien says it suits him, but I cannot stand it and went on a furious hunt this evening. Everyone says I'm looking so much better-far better than before our wedding. And how did you spend your Sunday? I look forward to hearing about it. It was wonderful yesterday to be able to say 'Theo will be here in eight days' time' - only then will I truly be on holiday. Even so, I'm far more at ease than I was those first few days-good- ness, it was wretched at times - but now everything's pleasant and back to normal.
Beb sang yesterday evening - she sings far more calmly and naturally than she used to, though it's not very different. Wim's playing quite nicely now,' but he's scarcely home- they're all mad about walking, there are always a couple out walking until 10 in the evening-I think it's odd. Beb is sitting beside me and keeps teasing me and laughing. She says, 'that's going to be a very coherent letter' and I'm afraid she's right. Dear husband, it's good to be in a different environment again -it's refreshing-you'll see when you're here. Mother asks if you'd get the house key from Dries, the one he took with him from Amsterdam-I'm just mentioning this while I think of it." Shall I bring the little one to meet you at the station? I'm longing to know whether you'll find him grown? He's become far, far cleverer, he clutches everything and knows exactly how to show us what he wants-and he talks so sweetly-chatting away while he's being undressed at night. I do wish tomorrow were here and that the letter from Paris had come. Night my dearest one, lots and lots of kisses-please come soon-are you also looking forward to it?
your loving
Wife
My dearest husband,
Last night I was too sleepy to write, but now, after coffee, my first job is to sit down and ask how you are. Monday no let- ter. Tuesday no letter. There's nothing the matter, is there? But no, there'll soon be something from you in the post.-' Our little fellow's coming along very well-he's growing as fat and round as a barrel and cleverer by the day; he's stopped throwing tantrums and is as gentle and sweet as a lamb. But then he's also kept busy all day-at the moment he's out with Mother and Beb. Have I told you the story about the carriage? Imagine, they weren't able to borrow or hire one, and now Father has just bought a cheap carriage (though it did cost 9 guilders) just like the one Mother has in Leiden- then they'll sell it again lat- er. Yesterday we received a couple of tiresome visits, then Mother and I called on Mrs Sijthoff,' but she wasn't in. In the evening Willem Häberling.3 An elderly lady whom you don't know is coming to dine with us today, so there's one thing or another every day-but it's not really too busy and far, far more pleasant now than it was the first few days. Even so, it's not home as it used to be, Beb is the hub at the centre of every- thing and everything's fine when she's there infecting us all with her madcap cheerfulness and gaiety, but no Beb and it's dull- the house has a different feel to it. Father has aged and doesn't assert himself any more, none of the others are interested in anything-there's an emptiness. But I wish you could see how sweet Father is with his grandson. He takes him on his lap gently and carefully so as not to break him, and he comes to see him early every morning and smiles and romps with him.
Oh, my dear husband, how wonderful it will be when you're here again in the morning when he wakes up-it feels as if we've been separated for so, so long. Did Fouache agree to take his leave in 2 halves? I can't wait to hear whether you're really coming on Sunday. I shall leave my letter open until three o'clock-unless the post comes in the meantime. Goodbye, my dearest, do you think of me often? I think of you-some times, just for fun, I pretend we're still engaged-but I'm glad it's not true. Lots of kisses from your son and
your very loving wife
P.S. Your letter has just arrived with the sad news about Vincent. I also had a premonition-his last letter really was rather extraordinary. Poor Vincent and poor, dear husband, instead of a rest you've got troubles and worries again. But for heaven's sake, don't think the worst and don't worry too much. It's awful being so far from you now - I'd give anything to be with you, after all, we belong together - why did I go away.
And now I'm totally in the dark-I don't know whether you're in Auvers or back in Paris. Did the same thing happen to him as last time? Is he in bed? Is Dr Gachet good to him? Do you have any idea how it happened? And there was I thinking he was cured once and for all - thank God you're no longer so far away from him- at least that's a comforting thought. My heart is with you, my beloved, if only I could do something for you or comfort you. Don't fret too much, dearest, and do take care of yourself. Say hello to the poor patient for me and wish him a speedy recovery. Do let me know what's happening, I'm thinking of you both constantly, goodbye, goodbye-
your Jo
Why are they so annoyed about it? When you come, you can tell them-they act as if the child arrived here starved and is on- ly starting to perk up now because of them and their bottles. And to think how well he looked in Paris before he took ill! Oh well, it's too childish to talk about and I'm doing my best not to get cross. My love, you shall think Jo's letters a waste of time, but there's nothing I can say except that I love you very dearly and miss you dreadfully. Do you know what Anna said this morning? 'Oh, yes, you're looking forward to Theo coming, I feel the same when Jan's away, but it's never as nice as you imagine'.-I don't believe her - I always loved it when you came home in the afternoon, and now that I've not seen you in all this time-how happy I shall be when you take me in your arms again. I'm far stronger now and well again. When we're back in our own dear home I shall be able to do things again to make it more pleasant for you and not always complain so.
What a wonderful thought, being together again in our own little nest, rested and well - Vincent better! Oh I do hope Vincent is better- had I only been a bit kinder to him when he was with us! Night my dearest beloved, lots and lots of kisses from us both. Hurry back to your very loving
Jo
Don't tell Dries too much about what I say in my letters, for it might be passed on again.
My beloved, my poor dear Theo,
words fail me. I am so sad, so profoundly sad, and I can't even put my arms around you and share in your grief. If only I had stayed there so I could at least be with you in these sad hours of your life.
And I knew nothing about it! I received that first letter from Auvers and was so sad to hear that Vincent was ill. I didn't realize it was so bad, you said, 'we'll talk about it', and I felt reassured. I did worry when no news came after that, but I kept telling myself 'I would hear about it if it were very bad'. And now I have just received a letter from Mother in Leiden and poor Wil, who is also grief-stricken- and they have told me the truth.2
Has he finally found peace after all his struggling and worrying and suffering-but he was still so young and what might he not have done in his life-all his marvellous gifts, his great mind, his wonderful talent - is that all gone, buried for ever? I have always thought death was the worst thing that could hap- pen to us. Oh my love, how we shall miss him. I still cannot grasp that it's true and that we shall never again receive those dear letters from him-never hear about his work any more. Oh, how I should have liked to see him again and say how sorry I was for having been impatient with him the last time. I wish I could fly to you, my dearest. There's nothing at all that I can do or say to comfort you- I would do anything, if I only could, to make up possible. for his loss-love you far, far more even, if that were
Just think of our darling, of our little Vincent, the treasure you still have. If we can only spare him the sorrow poor Vincent suffered. I cannot write any more because the post is about to go-I long to hear from you- will you come here or shall I come to you? All I want is to be with you now, to put my arms around you and show you how much I share in your grief and how dearly I love you. Goodbye, my dearest love, my thoughts are always with you,
your Jo.
Our darling is fine




